༄༅།།བོད་ཀྱི་ནང་བསྟན་དཔེ་ཚོགས་ལྟེ་གནས།།
Tibetan Buddhist Resource Center
Text Scan Input Form - Title Page
Work:
W1PD133159
ImageGroup:
ISBN:
12PD19047
9787223022033
LCCN:
n/a
Title:
གཞོན་ནུ་དྲུག་གི་རྟོགས་བརྗོད། (དབྱིན་བོད་ཤན་སྦྱར། )
gzhon nu drug gi rtogs brjod/ (dbyin bod shan sbyar/)
Author:
རྒྱལ་བའི་སྡེ
rgyal ba'i sde
n/a
n/a;n/a
Descriptor:
Original Publication:
Place:
Publisher:
Iha sa
bod ljongs mi dmangs dpe skrun khang/
2007
Date:
Volume:
Total Volumes:
TBRC Pages:
Introductory Pages:
Text Pages:
Scanning Information:
og information:
n/a
n/a
Scanned at Tibetan Buddhist Resource Center, Southwest University of Nationalities,
Chengdu, China.
mel sa ibetan Buddhist Resource Center, Southwest University of Nationalities,



གཞོན་ནུ་དྲུག་གི་རྟོགས་བརྗོད།
The Six Brothers
An English Translation
Pema Gyatso & Geoff Bailey
བོད་ལྗོངས་མི་དམངས་དཔེ་སྐྲུན་ཁང་།
Tibet People's Press



THE SIX BROTHERS
༄༅། །གཞོན་ནུ་དྲུག་གི་རྟོགས་བརྗོད།
An English Translation
Pema Gyatso and Geoff Bailey
བོད་ལྗོངས་མི་དམངས་དཔེ་སྐྲུན་ཁང་།
Tibet People's Press



图书在版编目(CIP)数据
六青年的故事(印)杰瓦德著;杰夫等译.-拉萨:
西藏人民出版社,2007.7
ISBN 978-7-223-02203-3
….宗教文学-民间故事-
心中說
I.六… 1.0杰杰
印度N. 1351.7
:「
之於
中国版本图书馆 CIP 数据核字(2007)第079240号
六青年的故事
年
法 治trixsinairetterest
Wira
编著古印度诗人杰瓦德
译 者 白玛加措,杰夫·贝利
责任编辑道韩·才让多杰
封面设计 杰夫·贝利
西藏人民出版社
出版发行
(拉萨市林廓北路20号)
刷四川大自然印刷有限公司
本 787mm X 960關 116
张 16
数 120 千
次 2007年7月第1版
次 2007年7月第1次印刷
数 01-2,000
号 ISBN978-7-223 - 02203-3
价 32.00 元
印开印字版印印书定
版权所有,翻印必究



.
CONTENTS
PREFACE .......
INTRODUCTION.
OPENING SALUTATION
...
..
..
.
CHAPTER ONE........
.............
..!! .....
CHAPTER TWO ..........
14
.
9
4
.
','.
CHAPTER THREE .....
D
CHAPTER FOUR ..........
CHAPTER FIVE .........
CHAPTER SIX ............
CHAPTER SEVEN .........
I.
'
COLOPHON
......155
BIBLIOGRAPHY ..
....... 157
I
!
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
TIBETAN TEXT



..
PREFACE
Translating into English such a text as The Six Brothers is a task not
to be undertaken lightly. It is with some trepidation that we present
this English translation. As this book represents the first attempt to
render The Six Brothers into English, we anticipate that different
opinions will arise as to the lexical choices we made and our overall
approach. Translation is not a perfect science and often requires one
to have a 'feel' for the author's originally intended meaning as well as
knowledge of both the linguistic structures employed and the
historical and religious context in which a text has been written,
Indeed, there is debate amongst Tibetan scholars as to the precise
meaning of certain passages of The Six Brothers, so some ambiguities
have required delicate treatment on our part.
Helping us in our quest for accuracy, we are deeply indebted to the
great mind of the eminent Tibetan scholar, Professor Tsewang, of
Tibet University. Close personal contact with him over the years, and
careful study of his excellent commentary on The Six Brothers,
(གཞོན་ནུ་དྲུག་གི་རྟོགས་བརྗོད་གསར་འགྲེལ། A New Commentary on The Six
Brothers. 2002.), has allowed us to improve this translation in a way
that would otherwise have not been possible. It was with great
sadness that we learned of his sudden and tragic passing away during
the course of working on this translation. We will always fondly
remember his generosity of spirit in teaching his many students, his
quick wit and lucid intellect. His contribution to Tibetan studies will
form a lasting legacy.
We are also very grateful for the Tibetan instruction we have received
from other outstanding teachers at Tibet University over a period of
many years. In particular, special thanks is due to Professor Lhakpa
Tseten, the Director of the Foreign Students Department, for his
comments and thoughtful input.
There are others, of course, that deserve our sincere gratitude for their
help in producing this book. Jigme Dorje, Tsering Penjor, and Tsomo
of the Tibetan Academy of Social Science, Lhasa, have been tireless



བགནད་ལ་སས་
in their support of this project. Tsewang Gyurme, the former
president of the Tibetan Academy of Social Science, has shown great
interest in this work and is always a source of encouragement. Mr
Sun Yung, the current president of the Tibetan Academy of Social
Science, has also been a keen supporter of joint co-operative projects.
We also wish to thank the People's Printing Press of the Tibet
Autonomous Region for kindly supplying us with a manuscript of the
Tibetan text for reproduction at the back of this book. It was a
pleasure to work with the staff of the People's Printing Press during
the publication process.
Thanks is also due to Mark Patterson and Mike Randall for their proof
reading and valuable comments and suggestions. A big thank you
also to Elke Martin for all her work on the layout and formatting.
Finally, we wish to thank the Tibet Autonomous Region Foreign
Affairs Bureau in Lhasa for supporting this project and providing the
necessary visas. Their unequivocal support, especially through the
personal involvement of Mr Ju Jianhua and Mr. Ma Zhijian, has been
greatly appreciated.



"!.."
INTRODUCTION
The writer of the colophon cautiously suggests that The Six Brothers
originated from India, written perhaps by the Indian Pandita Umapati
(#16). He further speculates that the Pandita Umapati is the Indian
scholar who was invited to Ngari by Khamba Gedun Sanbo, being the
same Umapati mentioned in the scripture Thubten Chidor
(apagga ) written by Kedrup Rinpoche. There may be no reason
to question Umapati's authorship, but since there is no conclusive
evidence to indicate whether this is true, other theories about the
authorship exist.
It is clear from the text itself that The Six Brothers is derived from
India, being set somewhere in the northern part. The likelihood that
this text has been translated from Sanskrit into the Tibetan language is
quite high, as this would follow an established tradition. However,
because of the absence of an original manuscript in Sanskrit, there is
continued speculation as to whether this is the case. Some suggest
that The Six Brothers could not be a translation from Sanskrit, because
of the beautiful way it has been written and that no translator, however
skilful, could reproduce this so well in Tibetan. There is a school of
thought which suggests The Six Brothers was first composed in
Tibetan by an unknown scholar who spent many years living in India.
It may be that this great Tibetan scholar first received this story as an
oral teaching from an Indian pandita and then decided to record it in
Tibetan.
Another established opinion by certain scholars in the Tibet
Autonomous Region is that The Six Brothers was written by
Shangshung Chowang Tragpa, (ཞང་ཞུང་ཆོས་དབང་གྲགས་པ་) the famous
disciple of Tsongkhapa, in order to dispel criticism that monks of the
Gelugpa sect were not capable of writing poetry. Regardless of who
the author or translator may be, all agree that he was a supreme master
of the Tibetan language and has written (or translated) a story, perhaps
six or seven hundred years ago, which is considered to be something
of a masterpiece.



The title of this text, གཞོན་ནུ་དྲུག་གི་རྟོགས་བརྗོད་ could be translated into
English as "The Biography of the Six Youths'. However, it is
immediately clear from the story that these six youths are indeed
brothers. The category of literature known as Fans (the
abbreviation of FraĚ5") has a broader meaning than just
'biography'. The term 'uaĚ5V is derived from the Sanskrit word
'avanda' and literally means the narration of a realisation'. A
šavašs is a story or narrative which typically deals with practical
lessons about living an ethical life. A biography, or more specifically
a spiritual biography, is known in Tibetan as a fg.
The Six Brothers is an intriguing narrative describing the six
perfections or 'paramitas' of the Bodhisattvas (which are the
foundation for obtaining enlightenment) and an exhortation to practice
them. According to the system of classifying texts into the three
baskets' of teachings (1979), a system established during the
reign of King Trisong Detsen (va 357) in the eighth century, this
particular Foydžs is considered to be a teaching which pertains to
the ‘basket' of teachings on ethical discipline - (259 par 15').
Tibetan poetry, or perhaps more correctly 'poetics', ( 50 literally
*pleasant sounding speech') can be a rich blend of both prose and
poetic verse. Poetic verse has strict metrical demands, being
dependent upon a certain number of syllables per line. The number of
syllables per line is always an odd number. Verses are typically four
lines comprised of five, seven, nine or eleven syllables. Though
somewhat rare, poetic verse can have up to as many as thirty three
syllables per line. In The Six Brothers there are a number of stanzas
which contain four lines each with thirty one syllables.
In contemporary Tibetan poetry, poetic verse is often broken up into
stanzas of four lines, with, of course, each line having the same
number of syllables. Stanzas do not necessarily require the same
number of syllables per line as the preceding stanza. Though
somewhat less common, stanzas of two, six or eight lines (all with the
same syllable count) are also possible. An entire poem can be one
long stanza of many lines, all containing the same number of
syllables. Apart from the syllable count, the foremost consideration in
composing Tibetan poetry, be that poetic prose or verse, is that it must



Om Wiktiona
be pleasing to the ears - known in Tibetan as . Though this may
appear somewhat of a subjective criteria, it is one that Tibetans seem
to have a unique ability to be acutely attuned to.
"
.
The Tibetan text of The Six Brothers is divided up into seven
chapters, including an introductory salutation. The division between
the stanzas of poetic verse and the sections of poetic prose are not
marked in the Tibetan text. However, we have separated the English
into poetic stanzas (usually of four lines, though there are some of six
and eight) and poetic prose. This has been done for ease of reading
and understanding.
."
"
'
.
This particular style of poetry, which combines verse and prose, is
known as T95555 or in its more commonly abbreviated
form བཅད་ལྷུག་སྤེལ་མ་ - ta mix of verse and prose”. (ཚིག་བཅད་ means
'verse' or chopped/cut words' and
means 'prose' or
"loose/relaxed words'.) We have translated each stanza of verse by
looking at it as a whole rather than line by liné. A line by line
translation of Tibetan poetry can often be very difficult to comprehend
in English. When studying the Tibetan text, it is necessary to look at
the whole stanza in order to grasp the intended meaning. Tibetan
poetry can be very dense and packed with meaning, usually requiring
expansion in English. What appears as a few words in the Tibetan text
often requires many words in English. Unable to preserve the poetic
meter of the Tibetan original, we have rendered the English verse
form in what could be called 'free' prose.
The subject of a sentence or a clause is often left implicit in Tibetan.
We have supplied the subject or agent when this has been necessary
for comprehension. We have also, on occasions, added other
information which is clearly implied by the context but is not explicit
in the text itself. This is again to help with clarity of understanding for
the reader. When the subject or contextual information has been
added, we have chosen not to enclose this in parenthesis, as is the
practice of others, as we felt that this impedes the natural flow of the
text.
Tibetans divide translation styles into three categories. The first is
known as 29Nt direct translation', the second 250*9GAT leaving



as is' translation (this is primarily concerned with transliterating the
pronunciation of Sanskrit words) and the third is Gost meaning
translation'. We have endeavoured to follow the 'meaning' school of
translation without, we hope, compromising the actual words of the
author. We have preserved the many similes, metaphors and
synonyms that are replete in this text, even though they may not
always sound perfectly natural in English. At times we have been
more direct or 'literal' in our translation, keeping in mind the need to
primarily transfer the intended meaning of the author.
Widely considered as the 'mother' of all contemporary Tibetan poetry,
The Six Brothers contains as many as one hundred and thirty different
kinds of metaphors, similes and synonyms. The scope of this study
does not include an identification or detailed explanation of these.
This would be a study of its own that would require another volume.
Our goal has been to transfer the meaning of this text as clearly and
accurately as possible. Tibetan poetry makes distinctions between
many kinds of similes and metaphors, and also has an elaborate
system of aq synonyms' or 'epithets'. The study of waniš5
(also translated as the study of 'synonomics' or 'metaphors') forms an
important part of Tibetan literature. Synonomics is one of the five
'lesser' or smaller branches of knowledge - known as the
རིག་གནས་ཆུང་བ་ལྔ།
When aans appear in the text, we have noted this as a footnote.
Sometimes we have translated the synonym or metaphor directly and
on other occasions we have given the meaning of the synonym. For
example, the moon has many different titles. One of them is
5#5017 'The Lord of the Stars'. We have used this title in the
text and given a footnote explaining its metaphorical content. In the
following cases, which are also all synonyms for the moon, we have
not always given the literal translation in the text but rather used
} The five minor branches of learming are: 1. སྙན་ངག་ poetry, 2. མངོན་བརྗོད་ །
synonyms, 3. སྡེབ་སྦྱོར་ literary composition, 4. སྐར་རྩིས་ astrology, 5. ཟློས་གར་ dance
and drama. The five major branches of learning, known as the 24
' are:
1. བཟོ་རིག་པ་ arts and crafts, 2. གསོ་བ་རིག་པ་ medicine, 3. སྒྲ་རིག་པ་ grammar/language,
4.459 pagal logic, 5.0557 4-a Buddhist philosophy.



'moon' with an explanation in the footnotes: 5229524795 Source
of Happiness, ཤེལ་གྱི་གཞལ་མེད་ཁང་ “Crystal Mansion, མཚན་མོའི་དབང་ཕྱུག་
«Lord of the Night , རི་བོང་ཅན་ “Rabbit Bearer', ཀུན་དགའི་བཞིན་ལྡན་ “The
Face Everyone Loves', 0557223549 The Source of Nectar”,
རི་བོང་གཟུགས་ལྡན་པའི་བསིལ་ཟེར་ཅན་ “The One of the Rabbit Image and Cool
Rays'.
.
We have translated only the first part of the colophon, as this section
was relevant to the text itself. The remainder of the colophon we did
not directly translate but gave a general summary as it has no
immediate relevance to the text itself. The entire colophon has been
included in the Tibetan text for those who may wish to study it. The
Tibetan manuscript that we used is the one published by the Tibet
People's Press (
5 5 5 NI851), in 1980. (The same
manuscript was reprinted in 2000, being the one that appears at the
end of this book. In the 2000 edition of the manuscript, a contents
page and chapter headings have been added. We have not translated
these contemporary additions as they were not part of the original
text.)
Tracing the lives of six brothers, this enchanting story is an analogy of
the six transcendental perfections or 'paramitas' of the Bodhisattvas.
The three older brothers represent all that is evil in the worldly.
existence of samsara and the three younger brothers represent the
perfect conduct of a true Bodhisattva - one who vows to attain
enlightenment for the benefit of other sentient beings. Both the
conduct and the names of the three younger brothers (Great
Understanding, Virtuous and Loving Kindness) clearly indicate their
exalted status as Bodhisattvas. Through the course of the story, the
three younger brothers exhort the older brothers to flee their corrupt
lives of folly and to enter the true path of enlightenment. Eventually
they succeed in doing so, but not without numerous misadventures
along the way.
The first chapter introduces each of the six brothers, describing their
various characteristics. The remaining six chapters are devoted to one
of the six perfections, presenting them in the correct order of
importance. The six perfections are: generosity, ethics, perseverance,
diligence, concentration and wisdom. (For a fuller discussion of



these, please refer to footnote number twenty in the opening salutation
on page sixteen.)
The primary focus in preparing this translation has been for those who
may wish to study the Tibetan text in conjunction with the English
translation, hence the extensive footnotes referencing the Tibetan text.
However, we have also attempted to make the translation meaningful
for those who are not students of the Tibetan language.
Finally, our intention in undertaking this translation has been to
further research Tibetan language and culture. It is to this end that we
hope we have made a worthwhile, though small, contribution to the
burgeoning discipline of Tibetan studies.



OPENING SALUTATION
In Sanskrit:- Kegu-mārā-awā-dhāna."
In the Tibetan language: gzhon nu drug gi rtogs pa brjod pa."
.
.
.
Homage to the All Knowing One.
:::
:::
:.
.
...
"
"
11.
You, the one who, born of the universal monarchº lineage in
Sergya,' discarded the kingdom of the four continents like
throwing away chaff and lived the life of an ascetic,
Who alone, in front of the precious tree,"defeated all the
hosts of devils and obtained the holy nectar of
incomparable enlightenment,
Who, for the purpose of leading migrators to the path of
the three vehicles and making them like yourself,
spun far and wide the wheel which illuminates
all false doctrines,
Who, in order to complete all of your deeds,'3
entered into sublime peacelt in the Sala's forest,
you, the Ruler of the Victorious,''protect us.!?
3.
.
A
.."
-1.
.2
"
"
"
"
Whoever listens will enjoy drops of nectar to the ears,
and beautiful images will bring great happiness
to the eyes.
The tongues of the readers will be endowed with good
fortune, and the minds of those who practice this teaching
will be given the fruits of their wishes.
The treasury of the intellects of those who understand
will greatly increase, and the ignorance of those
who do not understand will be overcome.
This profound, excellent and great poetic story indeed
deserves to be highly praised in the presence of the wise.
"
.
.
W.
A
W
"
Even though worldly people are inherently awash in the affliction of
the three poisons," which is the origin of endless suffering, by
believing in the vast Buddha nature20 and having compassion and
sublime wisdom, and by practicing the six perfections of the way of
.:
.
..
...
.
.
...
1
.
.
.
?:



20UV
A PA
LARORS
AWA
..
...
..
....
.
..
.
Vo The Six Brothers: Opening Salutation 200
the Great Vehicle,22 even they will not have difficulty in attaining
unsurpassed enlightenment.
Therefore, you should practice well the wonderful deeds of
Bodhisattvas.23
97715 though literally meaning 'Indian language, TN is understood as
referring to Sanskrit.
3 Kegu-mārā-awa-dhāna is an attempt to transliterate the Sanskrit and is not a
transliteration using the Wylie transliteration scheme.
* gzhon nu drug gi rtogs pa brjod pa is a Wylie transliteration of the title of this text.
The title could also be translated as "The Biography of the Six Youths', but a
0 9 :5" has a broader meaning than just 'biography', being a category of
literature which deals with practical lessons concerning living an ethical life.
a IT is a translation of the Sanskrit word avanda and literally means "the
parration of a realisation”. (རྟོགས་ངང་བརྗོད་པ་་ is often abbreviated to རྟོགས་བརྗོད་}
gov g ava is one of the titles of the Buddha. This epithet is also used of great
lamas and monks who possess Buddha-like qualities. The expression o r is
used when paying profound respect or giving a salutation. The expression is perhaps
best rendered as '(I) pay homage to'.
S a ras is commonly uttered while
prostrating. The compound verb 4 Roar means 'to prostrate' and as a compound
noun ‘prostration'. The entire expression DW118903q aramaya Rawat gives an
indication as to translator's or compilers' classification of this text. (This
'classification expression is known as a 1979). Classifying texts in this way
reflects the practise established by king Trisong Detsen, (A x 957), during the
eighth century. During Trisong Detsen's reign and under his guidance, Indian scholars
and Tibetan translators established three categories by which sacred writings were to
be classified. These are known as the '59 ''the three baskets'. (These
categories were based on the gaya' 'the three trainings of Buddha'. The three
trainings are 1. ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས་ ethics, 2. ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན་ concentration, 3. ཤེས་རབ་ wisdom.)



***
boo The Six Brothers: Opening Salutation goer
***inne
n
wwwwwwwwwww
.
.
.....
****
****
******
**********
************
The three categories or baskets' are l. 250 ' teachings on ethical
discipline, 2. až sa teachings on meditation and general religious discourses,
3. avatar 35 teachings on wisdom. At the beginning of each sacred writing,
translators or compliers would write a jot, or salutation, indicating the classification.
There are three different kinds of 947.1.996g'iq tagal mort indicated
that text was a category one or garnati2. «vhvr5535 angka
2015 marzo a category two or ES5, 3. agag5
གཞོན་ནུར་གྱུར་པ་ལ་ཕྱག་འཚལ་ལོ་ a category three or མངོན་པའི་སྡེ་སྣོད་. The Six Brothers
is a category one text because it is a teaching about ethical behaviour.
oodaag literally means 'one who steers a wheel'. These kings or
monarchs have extensive powers over the universe. There are four such kings, each
steering a wheel made of a different substance. The four are:
1.471
ANTT the monarch steering the golden wheel, 2. 5500
འཁོར་ལོས་བསྒྱུར་བ་ the monarch steering the silver wheel, 3. ཟངས་ཀྱི་འཁོར་ལོས་
བསྒྱུར་བ་ the monarch steering a copper wheel, 4. ལྕགས་ཀྱི་འཁོར་ལོས་བསྒྱུར་བ་ the
monarch steering the iron wheet.(འཁོར་ལོས་བསྒྱུར་བ་ is also spelled འཁོར་ལོ་བསྒྱུར་བ་)
NTN monks and laity', the colour yellowish white, an idiom for the sun and the
name of the city of Buddha's birth. According to legend, the city derived its name
from a famous sage called
T
y ' who had long, yellow and white dreadlocks
and taught religion in that city. (A 555 was a sage or ascetic who
often possessed magical powers.)
Sania These are the four continents of Buddhist cosmology which surround Mt.
Meru in the འདོད་ཁམས་ •desire realm». The four are: 1. ཤར་ལུས་འཕགས་པོ་ the
eastern continent of Supreme Bodies, 2. earsals the southern continent of the
Rose Apple Tree, 3.99995š5 the western continent of Utilising Cattle,
4.95 Hãy the southern continent of Unpleasant Sounds.
S TART is to practice asceticism or to live as a hermit after renouncing all
worldly life. Buddha practiced extreme asceticism for six years before he obtained
enlightenment.
10 ཤིང་མཆོག་ is a reference to བྱང་ཆུབ་ཤིང་ the Bodhi tree under which Buddha attained
enlightenment. The Bodhi tree is a species of the Indian fig tree.
It འགྲོ་ is a reference to འགྲོ་བ་རིགས་དྲུག་ the six migrators who are caught in cyclical
or 'samsaric' existence. They are sometimes referred to as 'transmigrators', but this
can give the sense that they have escaped from the wheel of suffering when in fact
they have not. The six migrators are: gods, E wa demigods, æ humans, 5520
animals, 159V hungry ghosts or pretas and Goara' hell beings.
..
.
.
.
..



bon The Six Brothers: Opening Salutation goed
129979ar the three vehicles. These are: I. g eri the hearer's vehicle,
2. རང་རྒྱལ་གྱི་ཐེག་པ་ the solitary learning vehicle, 3. བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་དཔའི་ཐེག་པ་ the
Bodhisattva vehicle. According to another classification the three are: 1.995
དམན་པ་ the low vehicle or Hinayana. 2. ཐེག་པ་ཆེན་པོ་ the great vehicle or
Mahayana, 3. Det the tantric vehicle or Vajrayana. (The two vehicles
ཉན་ཐོས་ཀྱི་ཐེག་པ་ the hearer's vehicle and the རང་རྒྱལ་གྱི་ཐེག་པ་ the solitary leaming
vehicle belong to the ཐེག་པ་དམན་པ་ Hinayana vehicle and the བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་དཔའི་
ཐེག་པ་ vehicle belongs to the ཐེག་པ་ཆེན་པོ་ Mahayana vehicle. The ་
བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་དཔའི་ཐེག་པ་ vehicle is also known as the ཕ་རོལ་ཏུ་ཕྱིན་པའི་ཐེག་པ་ the
paramita' vehicle.)
1 མཛད་པ་མཐའ་དག་ is a reference to the twelve great deeds of Buddha Shaykamuni -
also known as the 551195maa The twelve are:
1.5929999 qarana avesat coming down from Tushita heaven',
2. Wa'a'y naam entering into his mother's womb,
3. Nagara as being born, 4. štamgaravutia weget
displaying skills in arts and crafts, 5. བཙུན་མོའི་འཁོར་དུ་དགྱེས་པར་རོལ་པའི་མཛད་པ་
enjoying the Queen and her cohorts, 6. 15535awg 5renouncing worldly
life and taking the vows of a monk, 7. ལོ་དྲུག་དཀའ་བ་སྤྱད་པའི་མཛད་པ་ living the life
of an ascetic for six years, 8. བྱང་ཆུབ་ཤིང་དྲུང་དུ་ལམ་བསྒོམ་པའི་མཛད་པ་ meditating
under the Bodhi tree, 9. བདུད་བཅོམ་པའི་མཛད་པ་ defeating the devils,
10.50HyTa'ng' attaining enlightenment, 11. V gozantina
མཛད་པ་ turning the wheel of dharma, 12. སྐུ་མྱ་ངན་ལས་འདས་པའི་མཛད་པ་ entering
into Nirvana.
1497 Tagad is a reference to Buddha's final great deed of passing into Nirvana,
also known as Ng'
waganger
"Sgar is a transliteration of the Sanskrit word "Sala' which is a type of tree found in
India and sub-Himalayan regions.
16 farnagas is one of Buddha's titles and is also used for the highest lamas in
Tibet. qarag'595 could also be translated 'Lord of the Conquerors' or
“Powerful Victorious One'.
!? The expression gargaar is an unusual one. The author is not suggesting that
Buddha be protected but rather that he, the author, the listeners and the readers be
protected from any spiritual obstacles which might impede understanding. This is not
a typical usage of the pronoun (55'. In Tibetan poetry, honorifics are often used
differently than they are in the spoken language.
& MITTEN are those who are caught up in the cyclical existence or 'samsaric'
world.
19 The དུག་གསུམ་ are: 1. འདོད་ཆགས་ lust, 2. ཞེ་སྡང་ hatred, 3. གཏི་མུག་ ignorance. The
three poisons are the root of all suffering and misery in the world and are the forces
which continue to drive the cyclical ‘samsaric' existence.
Bottish S
14
0
42



boo The Six Brothers: Opening Salutation coer
20 Laag ri literally "One Thus Gone', is an epithet of the Buddha.
21 5 3qu'go the six perfections or 'paramitas' of the Bodhisattvas.
5 9'' is derived from the Sanskrit word 'paramita’ and literally means 'gone
to the other side'. It is translated as the 'six perfections' because it refers to the
attainment of these six virtuous practices to the highest level possible. The imagery
here is of one going to the furthest possible extreme in attainment of these virtues,
something like going as far as possible across an ocean. The six are commonly
abbreviated as 395 They are:
1. Taug the perfection of generosity.
(There are three kinds of generosity:
1. ཟང་ཟིང་གི་སྦྱིན་པ་ the giving of material things, 2. ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྦྱིན་པ་ the
giving of the dharma, 3. Nuage the giving of fearlessness.)
2.margari g ' the perfection of ethical or moral behaviour. This could also
be translated as natural or moral law'.
3. 559aga the perfection of forbearance, especially in respect to enduring
great hardship, pain and humiliation. "Patience', 'perseverance' and 'endurance are
also incorporated into this perfection.
4. Finavi s the perfection of perseverance, especially with respect to
doing virtuous deeds. Also translated as 'effort", "diligence', *zeal' or 'enthusiasm'.
5.quae59' s the perfection of concentration or meditative absorption',
particularly with regard to deeply focussed meditation.
6. 14750 the perfection of wisdom or 'pure consciousness', especially
with regard to having the mind of emptiness.
22 DOTT the "Great Vehicle' because of its system of Bodhisattvas. Also
commonly known as the Mahayana school of Buddhism.
23 955'wagga - a translation of the Sanskrit term "bodhisatva'. Bodhisattvas
are those who have vowed to attain perfect spiritual enlightenment for the benefit of
all migrators and hence are also known as “heroic beings of enlightenment'.
('Bodhisattva' is also spelled "bodhisatva'.)
5



.
.
CHAPTER ONE
And then I heard this: A long time ago there was a land called ALL IS
MANIFEST.24 It was a blissful, prosperous place. A land of great
harvests, filled with many people. The sublime pleasures rivaled
those of the divine realm.25
Mountain ranges encircled the whole area.
Cities filled this vast holy land.
Many streams adorned the herbal forests.
The beauty of this place was like it had just been newly
formed.
.W.
nikiskasserwirawi wawili haberleri www
It was as though the possessions, grain and many treasures,
Upon hearing how morally upright and
Wonderfully blessed the inhabitants who dwelt in this place
were,
Had abandoned their own land and gathered together
there.26
w
Having obtained happiness, prosperity and renowned riches,
And for bringing to ultimate completion the blissful pleasures
of the higher realms, 27
It was as if the inhabitants, who had acquired merit in
another realm,
Had all been born together in this place.
In the middle of this country was a very large and lovely looking city
called THE ABODE OF BRAHMA.28 It contained myriads of houses and
ro
2* སྣ་ཚོགས་འབྱིན་
2s ལྷའི་འཇིག་རྟེན་ཁམས་
26 This verse is an example of personification in Tibetan poetry. This is known as
སེམས་མེད་རབ་རྟོག་ The author has employed the technique of personification
regularly throughout this text.
27 auge the three higher realms of gods, demigods and humans.
i ste
Min



Boy The Six Brothers: Chapter One your
was adorned with bazaars, parks and many amusement chambers.
This city was even as beautiful as a city of the gods!
The city, which was encircled by a golden coloured wall
And beautified by clusters of brightly coloured houses,
Appeared like a gold pond of lotus flowers in full bloom
Illuminated by rays of the sun."
The many people dwelling there
Were like bees surrounding a golden pond of lotus flowers.
Satisfied with such great pleasures, 80 .
Their happiness compelled them to sing and dance with joy.
Gazing upon the amazing performances
And the great wealth that adorned the bazaars,
The people were so enthralled they could not remember
if it was night or day.
They thus enjoyed themselves like the gods of desire."
Now in this city, there was a stupid and lazy man. He enjoyed
sleeping and aimlessly wandering about. He could not distinguish
between good and evil. Since he had a dull mind, the people" named
him DARKNESS. 33
He, whose mind's eye4 had been completely bound by
darkness
.
.
.
..
.
.
28 ཚངས་པའི་འབྱུང་གནས་ in this context is a metaphorical reference to the Indian god
Brahma and is not referring to his actual birth place. (The Brahman caste is known as
བྲམ་བྦེ་)
29 aas5 literally “maker of the day', being a metaphor for the sun.
30 mg in this context means that their desires had been attended to, met or fulfilled.
3125 " desire gods' who inhabit 255 ANSV the desire realm.
52 RETE y literally 'worldly ones'. This expression also refers to the laity
and people in general.
33 VT' 'g is a reference to
m 'ignorance', 'delusion' or 'obscurity', being
one of the 5019 'three poisons”.
34 བློ་མིག་
18



.
.::
:
:..!!,
10g The Six Brothers: Chapter One oer
And was as black as a black poisonous plant, 35
Was accustomed to always sleeping and being slothful.
His mind, having turned away from the place of discernment,
Knew nothing of virtuous deeds.
He was, however, an expert in evil deeds.
He was filthy and loved dirty places..
He lived as if he were a slave of the lowest caste.
DARKNESS' brother was called SON OF DESIRE." He had a fine figure
and was very handsome. He was in the habit of hoarding grain and
riches and his many possessions made him very rich indeed. SON OF
DESIRE spent his time always singing and dancing and engaging in
licentious talk. He was so inflamed with passion, that sensual
pleasure and avarice had taken control of him. He was not generous
and not at all content.40
He was full of the pride of his beauty and youth,
Constantly yearning for riches and amorous chatter.
His mind was intoxicated with the alcohol "Iof craving, and
Being impudent, he had abandoned the clothes of modesty. 42
3 ནག་པོ་བརྩེགས་པ་ is a type of poisonous black plant and is synonymous with
ཧ་ལ་ནག་པོ་
36 Avant is a particular type of laziness, idleness or slothfulness due to being
excessively attached to pleasure.
37 ašara' is a person from the lowest Hindu caste, commonly referred to as an
"untouchable'. m arai is also a literary term for fishermen and butchers both of
whom are considered to be outcasts in Tibetan society.
38 55 rang literally means "the son of the god of illicit desire or sensuality":
39 saat means 'face' or appearance'.
40 g ugyar m inv ta50 literally means on the
opposite side of contentment and generosity. Or, that he was at the opposite end of
being content and charitable'.
41*** is Tibetan beer or liquor brewed from barley or rice. It is pronounced 'chung'.
65' also refers to alcohol in general.
42 The expression is an example of a 48 no', a certain type of
metaphorical expression used extensively in Tibetan literature. 200 is similar
to དཔེ་རྒྱུན་



10. The Six Brothers: Chapter One goor
Even though he was as rich as the Lord of Wealth43
He was not satisfied, and his craving eyes of desire*4
Which, when they saw beautiful things,
Found nothing at all they did not want to own.
The third brother was very angry and extremely violent. He had a
frightening face,** golden coloured hair and a golden moustache. He
never smiled, was extremely strong and highly skilled in the use of
weapons, catapults and other machines of warfare." He hated other
people and was totally intolerant of anyone. Thus, he was called
VIOLENCE.47
This one who was very terrifying in appearance,
Who was brave, a subduer of enemies, and skilled in warfare,
Who was angry and unbearably wrathful,
Would terrify people even by uttering a single word.
To the people he was like an angel of the LORD OF
THE DEAD.48
In his craving for evil he was like a real flesh-eating
demon.49
He was as powerful as a heroic demigod."
He acted viciously and caused harm to others.
The fourth brother was not like the others since he was a man of faith,
diligence and mindfulness." He was deeply saddened by the affairs of
ལུས་ངན་ is synonymous with རྣམ་ཐོས་སྲས་ The Lord of Wealth is one of the four
great kings, ruling over the northern region. He is also known as the ruler of the
05 . (from the Sanskrit "yaksa'), the malevolent, harm bringing demons.
44 Sanaa 'craving eyes' is an expression meaning whatever he saw he wanted.
45
D a y' in this context does not literally mean 'black face', but rather that he was
frightening and made people look away when they saw him.
འཕྲུལ་འཁོར་ in this context is not referring to machinery in general, but weapons of
warfare.
* "Lord of the Dead', also commonly known as are far or ‘Yamah”.
Na is a 'flesh eating' or 'cannibal' demon.
augs are one of the six migrators who are continually at war with one another.



..
:
von The Six Brothers: Chapter One yer
the world and not at all interested in them. Rather, he preferred
solitude and being zealous in worshipping the Three Jewels. He
never even gave sin a chance. His name was VIRTUOUS."
This man, whose heart was greatly grieved,
Saw worldly existence as a prison.
Knowing that pleasures and enjoyments
were like poisonous water,
He regarded wealth as something to throw away like chaff.
He was afraid of the distraction of worldly affairs,
preferring instead to hide in solitary places, where,
With tears of faith, which completely filled his eyes,
He piously worshipped the Three Jewels day and night ---
As if he was unsatisfied with the fruits of his merit.
VIRTUOUS' younger brother practiced holy deeds well, his heart was
fulls4 of great compassion, and he was diligent in helping sentient
beings. He disregarded his own life and was only concerned for
others. The people thus called him LOVING KINDNESS *s and loved
him greatly.
!
W WWWWUWWA AIW.WAWA WAUWAWA WATU WAWALUWUWULL%29.9.-12.00
5159**mindfulness', 'awareness', or 'recollection'. 59 *' is a very important part
of the path to enlightenment. 57' is one of the five determinative mental states
(Uruhara") and one part of The Eight Fold Noble Path (26au 5 R$75').
The ཡུལ་ངེས་ལྔ་ are: 1. འདུན་པ་ intention/aspiration, 2. མོས་པ་ conviction/devotion,
3.5957 mindfulness/awareness, 4.55TRÊT concentration/meditative absorption,
5. ཤེས་རབ་ wisdom. The འཕགས་ལམ་ཡན་ལག་བརྒྱད་ (Eight Fold Noble Path) are:
1. ཡང་དག་པའི་ལྟ་བ་ right doctrine, 2. ཡང་དག་པའི་རྟོག་པ་ right thought,
3. ཡང་དག་པའི་ངག་ right speech, 4. ཡང་དག་པའི་ལས་ཀྱི་མཐའ་ right action,
5. ཡང་དག་པའི་འཚོ་པ་ right livelihood, 6. ཡང་དག་པའི་རྩོལ་པ་ right effort,
7.495912255'" right mindfulness, 8. 0554 arza" right
concentration. (The ཡུལ་ངེས་ལྔ་ are also known as the ཡུལ་ངེས་བྱེད་ལྔ་)
༄༅ དཀོན་མཆོག་
$350198
$4 a9 literally soaked.
55 waam inas- an affectionate, loving and kind person or a close, dear friend.
While the term gaa ' is often translated as “loving kindness', translating
waarmeqazas ‘Loving Kindness' seemed an appropriate title.
WWWWWW



Woo The Six Brothers: Chapter One goer
He, who was controlled by loving kindness and compassion,
Considered even his enemies to be like his parents.
He was a great friend of the poor,
Earnestly helping others and disregarding even his own life.
When he saw people suffering,
He felt even more suffering than they did.
The happiness of others made him glad,
But his own happiness did not bring him as much joy.
The youngest brother was called GREAT UNDERSTANDING." He was
very wise, extremely capable, a great scholar and very honest. He
knew well the difference between right and wrong. GREAT
UNDERSTANDING was excellent at arts and crafts, and was well
versed in the Vedas and the correct teachings. He was mindful and
alert 60 and was respectful to Brahmans and the elderly. He was
devoted to looking after the poor and defenceless. To the people he
was a great master, giving them special teachings. Thus, GREAT
UNDERSTANDING was in the habit of always acting in accordance with
his many great qualities.
56 banesañña
57 am is one of the five major branches of learning, which are known as the
རིག་གནས་ཆེ་བ་ལྔ་. The five major branches are: 1. བཟོ་རིག་པ་ arts and crafts,
2. གསོ་བ་རིག་པ་ medicine, 3. སྒྲ་རིག་པ་ grarmmar/language, 4. གཏན་ཚིགས་རིག་པ་ logie,
5. ནང་དོན་རིག་པ་ Buddhist philosophy.
58 29795 are the ancient pre-Buddhist Vedic Indian scriptures. There are four Vedas
(རིག་བྱེད་བཞི་). These are: 1. སྙན་ངག་ poetry, 2. ངེས་བརྗོད་ wise sayings or
revelations, 3. 3 worship and sacrifice, 4.55 Na politics.
5999796V is typically translated as "treatise' or commentary”. In this context,
however, şqat' refers to both the correct or true words of the Buddha and the
commentaries about his teachings.
60 དྲན་དང་ཤེས་བཞིན་
62 ཕོངས་པ་དང་མགོན་མེད་པ་རྣམས་
63 909 are oral teachings or instructions which are usually the essential or most
appropriate teachings. ag7054 also tend to be short, pithy instructions and are
often secretive. W at is a very closely related term. The oral teachings of a
WT 501" appear to be shorter in length than 150 and so are perhaps best
glossed as “quintessential teachings'.



von The Six Brothers: Chapter One coel
Though he was very clever, he was not proud.
Though a great person, he did not disregard the weak.
Though young, he was not full of adolescent pride. 4.:;
Though wealthy and happy, he was not intoxicated with
desire.
Was there anything that he did not know
About all the branches of learning of the world?
Since he had studied so much, he could discern all things.
With great understanding he performed virtuous deeds.
His flawless and lucid mind
Was like a full moon in autumn."
He was like the sun for all the people
Showing sentient beings the right path.
MTUNTUTIMMYMMYUWOYTYWYYMITMwim
Like the wishing tree, She fulfilled all the hopes of the people.
Like a holy guide, he gave special teachings.
Like a great king,"many people respected him.
So in this world his glory was like that of Mount Meru.??
Trim Tirmim Mohama MWWWWMWMMMMM MAX MAMMYYMYYMM
64 That is, the typical pride of an adolescent.
» གཙུག་ལག་གཞུང་ལུགས་ are the learning systems of the world and also refer to the two
branches of learnings known as a g ar worldly existence and emancipation
from samsaric existence.
66 The moon is considered to be clearest during the season of autumn. This is because
the summer rains have passed and the atmosphere is relatively free of dust.
67 kama is literally beneficial path' but in this context refers to the correct or
'right' path.
68 9109War is the wish-fulfilling tree of the divine realm.
6 བཤེས་གཉེན་དམ་པ་ a holy teacher or spiritual guide.
༡ མན་ང the oral: teachings of a མན་ངག་ appear to be shorter in length than
015 " and so are perhaps best glossed as 'quintessential teachings'. (See also
footnote 63.)
7 V T T is a great protector of the world. This expression is often used as an
epithet for a great king or ruler.
72 is a metaphor for mountain and also a reference to Mt.Meru, the mountain
in the centre of 255 av the desire realm,
SUMMAMU TIM



vorge The Six Brothers: Chapter One your
As millions of rays make the sun" radiant,
And rows of water lilies adorn the wish-fulfilling lake,
And forests beautify a mountain,
So this great master was adorned with many great qualities.
To the ears of the wise the name 'GREAT UNDERSTANDING'
Became a beautiful adornment.
Like beads on a thread, so words about him
Proclaimed the precious garland of his virtuous glory."
The six brothers, who dwelt in this city together, were like a mirror
that clearly showed the right and wrong of this world.
..
..
...
..
Even though herbal plants and poisonous shrubs grow in the
same ground, one has the ability to benefit and one has the
ability to harm;
Even though inherently black charcoal may be washed with
pure water," and wiped again and again with a pure white
cloth, it will still not become white;
Even though lotus flowers grow and exist in a cesspool,
they do not get covered with mud but remain pure and
become a white ornament for the lake;7so
.........
.......
....
.
.
.
.
.
..
..
.
.
.
..
...!!****.
......
.
...
73 215 ka mga literally friend of the lotus’, being a metaphor for the sun.
༡༠ ཡིད་བཞིན་མཚོ་
75 The imagery here is of the beads of a rosary telling each other of Great
Understanding's wonderful characteristics as they are threaded through a rosary bead
or garland. In this way his fame spread from one person to another.
76 GEOT passa 5 literally the 'flaws and virtues of the world'.
7? wanao53 literally 'water possessing eight qualities'. This may be a
reference to the Ganges but this seems unlikely as the Ganges is known as 595"
The eight qualities are: 1:རོ་མངར་བ་ sweetness, 2. རང་བཞིན་བསིལ་བ་ coolness,
3. འཇམ་པ་ smoothness, 4. ཡང་བ་ lightness, 5. དྭངས་བ་ clearness,
6.459 cleanliness; 7. Jagaaram 5* not harmful to the throat, 8.
105 beneficial to the stomach.
18 2016 literally means "treasure water' and is a metaphor for the sea. In this
context refers to a lake or pond.
..
ww
w
w
wwww
w wwwwwwwwww
ww.
.
**2113



boy The Six Brothers: Chapter One ser
In the same way that a fire's heat and the wind's power
co-exist, these brothers, even though they lived together and
constantly dwelt amongst faults and virtues, they acted
towards one another very differently.
In summary, I will say that although holy and evil people are born
together, and so have become habituated to their good or bad
behaviour for a long time, their natural dispositions are not the same.
This is chapter one.
79 55 far is the natural state or condition of something, but in this context refers to
people's inherent behaviour or conduct.
eae



CHAPTER TWO
Then, after a short while, the season turned to spring.
Seeing that the summer festival was near,
Lady Earth, whose body hairs stood up like budding sprouts,
Became ignited with the heat of desire, and
Perspiration from her body melted away the ice.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
Upon hearing this, joyous desire arose in the trees, 80
Who, becoming a little red in colour,
Smiled happily
Like wagging tongues summoning friends.
...
.
.
.
Seeing this glorious place,
The wind king became jealous.
As if wanting to steal beautiful jewellery
He sent great dust storms again and again.
.
.
.
In the race track of the sky,
The cloud kings were riding the horses of the wind,
Galloping quickly to the far east
As if pursuing the festivities of the land of Superior Bodies. &?
..
.
..
.
.
..
.
.
Seeing thick clouds of dust covering the whole area,
And noticing that the sun was twice as hot as normal,
The people did not go outside,
Preferring to stay inside their god-like houses.82
.
..
.......
..
.
..
.
.
80 Gigas' is a generic word for tree and also means 'vines? or creepers'.
squarciamava organa is the mythical eastern continent of Supreme
Bodies.
82 mahalgo in this context is a metaphor for thouses". Qabag' is also the name of
the god of immortality.



wwwwww
TV Tomboy
1
The Six Brothers: Chapter Two yo
However, at that time, SON OF DESIRE wanted to go to other places to
search for riches. So he said to his younger brothers,
"Sleep will cause you to lose your wealth and
You will become like a fallen, rotten tree trunk.
So, in order to acquire things and to gain the respect
of others,
We should travel around to other places."
The three older brothers then left the city and started their journey.
The three younger brothers, because they loved their older brothers
and were concerned about them, followed after them. When the six of
them arrived at the east gate of the city, they saw a poor woman
giving birth. The pain was so great that she could not give birth to the
child. Since she was experiencing such agony, she cried so loudly that
the whole area was full of her screams. Upon seeing this, LOVING
KINDNESS was filled with great compassion and said,
"Oh my! Who is this dressed in membrane's clothes, 83
Being only half way out and screaming,
Who looks like a piece of the moon
Which has been eaten by Rahu284
Through her ignorance she drank the poison of lust and
Like being overcome by a poisonous snake bite
Her stomach has greatly increased in pain.
Oh!, this poor helpless mother is suffering greatly.”
8 ཕྲུ་མའི་གོས་གྱོན་ literally *dressed in the clothes of the amniotic sac». ཕྲུ་མོ་ is the
amniotic sac of an embryo.
84 395 is the Tibetan name of the planet Rahu (also sometimes spelled 55'),
which according to Indian cosmology is said to be the ruler of the planets. Rahu is
responsible for causing eclipses by temporarily swallowing the moon or the sun. Rahu
is one of the ten planets or mag'NG' The ten planets are: 1. W'a' Sun, 2. a Moon,
3. Ragam Mars, 4. ***** Mercury, 5.75" Jupiter, 6.5105 Venus, 7. Ega
Satur, 8. 78' Rahu or ‘Eclipse Maker', 9.517 “Time Fire', 10.257
‘Long Tail?.



Vo The Six Brothers: Chapter Two ze
Then GREAT UNDERSTANDING said,
"As for this, the first mechanism of suffering
For all migrators, is called 'birth' -
Which leads progressively to the pain
Of ageing, sickness and death.
Karma's executioner leads the spirits of Pardoso helplessly
along the path of the five migrators by tying and pulling
them with the noose of desire, and
Inserts them tightly into the cannibal demon abode 8 of the
womb, being like a metal box with blood, semen and
excrement.
Like being in the hottest and coldest hells, 89
the child'endures much suffering caused by the
temperature changes of extreme heat and extreme cold.
8S Song is “suffering' or ‘misery?: asana the four sufferings of birth,
ageing, sickness and death are endured by all sentient beings. (There are also the three
sufferings: 1.5479 so the suffering of suffering itself,
2.29 maa rt the suffering of change, 3. 99'1125350 a the
suffering of compounded phenomenon or 'all pervasive suffering.)
86 is the 'in-between' or 'interlude' state between death and rebirth.
87 Though usually grouped as “the six migrators’, in this section they are referred to as
the five migrators, 55'29'ua with the categories of and rug" grouped
together.
88 T ROSSF is literally 'the cannibal demon city'. This idiom highlights the
perceived torture of being in the womb.
89 མནར་མེད་ is the eighth and hottest hell of the eight hot hells (ཚ་དམལ་བརྒྱད་) and
ཀྱི་ཧུད་ is one of the coldest of the eight coldest hells (གྲང་དམྱལ་བརྒྱུད་. *The eight hot
hells, in order of increasing suffering, are: 1.45 “Reviving', 2.
A n Black
Line, 3. བསྡུས་འཇོམས་ “Crushing, 4. ངུ་འབོད་ wailing', 5. ངུ་འབོད་ཆེན་པོ་ •Great
Wailing', 6. 'Heat', 7. 10:56 Extreme Heat', 8. Natava 'Unending
Torment. The eight cold hells, in order of increasing suffering, are: 1.5 5
'Blisters’, 2. 5 or 'Broken Blisters', 3. gangast Chattering Teeth,
4. 9595t "Crying Kyi-hu', 5.(par Crying A-chu', 6. 5arena
Splitting Like an Utpala', 7. 153TV "Splitting Like a Lotus',
8. Q5
Splitting Like a Great Lotus'.
90 g ain is literally bubble body' being a metaphor for 'body'. In this context
ཆུ་བུར་ལུས་ refers to the unborn child.



Be The Six Brothers: Chapter Two ser
Furthermore, the unbearable pain of being born
is the first of the evil karmic consequences for all
migrators.
Being restrained in the womb is the beginning
of the frightening prison of cyclical existence.
Being wrapped in the membranous net is also the beginning
of being noosed by karma's Lord of Death.”
The distinct sound of a crying baby is the beginning
of the wails of perpetual suffering.
Descending onto rough bedding is the beginning
of dwelling in the abyss of the fire of affliction.94
So, if the terrifying
Cycle of reincarnation is not cut,
It will be like being in the watermill of the
Perpetual cycle of suffering of the six migrators."
After saying these things, they then travelled on to many other places.
In front of the gate of a different city, there were some women beggars
who were as skinny as hungry ghosts. They had bluish grey 8 faces,
untidy hair and husky voices. They looked as though they were
covered inside and out with dust. When the beggars saw the six
52735is literally "descending’, but in this context is an expression meaning
'birth'.
92 g'aage literally, 'the net of the amniotic sac..
93 957
Rough blankets on smooth, soft baby skin is the cause of great pain.
S 53" literally means 'birth's water flow,' but is a metaphor for ‘rebirth' or
reincarnation?.
* Q UEST' is a metaphor for 'reincarnation', like the beads of the life cycle, one
follows after the other.
97 501 'preta' or 'hungry ghost'.
985 N is the colour of ashes. This colour is used to describe someone who is
unhealthy or unwell. Often this condition has been caused by poor hygiene and lack of
nutritious food.
99 wasana' is literally 'dry throats', but in this context refers to the beggars'
voices.
30



bo The Six Brothers: Chapter Two se
brothers, they stood up feebly and prostrated to them. Stretching out
their arms, which were like dried tree branches, the beggars said to
them,
"Oh! Like the only fruitless, shrivelled up trees
In a dense forest,
So we alone, in this prosperous city,
Without even a drop of merit are destitute..
As for you, the seed of the tree of virtue
Has been planted in your hearts.
You are like the flourishing branches of prosperity
From which the tree of merit itself has been born.
In the same way water from a well increases when
drawn out, and
Branches of a tree increase when pruned
So in this life and the next life,
Prosperity is dependent upon generosity itself.
As singing and dancing make the body alive,
And wonderful qualities make wonderful descendents,
And truth makes the speaker great,
So generosity makes those with great abundance beautiful. '02
Therefore, through the means of precious generosity,
Please satisfy the destitute ones, and
Also make yourselves full of the
Riches of fame in this world.” 103
100005 F Saaga means to be completely lacking in any karmic merit.
101 y igs literally means 'that which drinks through its feet', being a metaphor for
"tree"
10? En in this context is not referring to physical beauty, but to excellent or
wonderful qualities.
03 gota FONT=5459 literally “full with the wealth/riches of fame..
31



W
WW.
AIRRORMERAWASIHI
.
..
WANELO
w
wwwwwwwwww1+09.
WMWW
Y TYWAT-
bo The Six Brothers: Chapter Two gor
WW
The three younger brothers then took off their clothes made of the
finest cotton "4 worth thousands of gold coins. They also took off
their earrings, necklaces, rings and garlands of long necklaces, which
were made of many kinds of precious jewels, and gave them all to the
beggars. Not holding back anything at all, they also gave them all
their other provisions. Then the three brothers took the beggars' old,
patched-up clothes, which were torn and completely covered in lice
and nits like a net of pearls, and they put them on, being exceedingly
happy. Seeing this, SON OF DESIRE mockingly laughed at them
saying,
W WWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWOWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWW
“Look at this strange behaviour!
Excessive generosity undermines one's valor.
What is appropriate is to give
The remainder of what you have used!
Giving away very expensive clothes and
Precious jewellery,
In exchange for lice and nit infested clothes -
Oh, you really are experts at doing business!”
Then GREAT UNDERSTANDING, in order to show the great joy of
giving, said in poetic verse,
“Friends, we are not accustomed to avarice, los
Nor do we cling to the desires of the body and
material things.
IM TEAM is a transliteration of the Sanskrit ‘kashika', being fine cloth, cotton or
muslin from Benares.
105 AT literally "yellow nose'. The name "yellow nose' was given to merchants who
sold golden images and whose noses were golden in colour from rubbing their hands
on their wares and then touching their noses as they conducted business. Hence the
term is now translated avarice, greed, stinginess or miserliness. There are five types of
avarice. The སེར་སྣ་ལྔ་ are: 1. ཆོས་ལ་སེར་སྣ་ stinginess with the dharma,
2. རྙེད་པ་ལ་སེར་སྣ་ stinginess with things obtained, 3. གནས་པ་ལ་སེར་སྣ་ stinginess with
dwelling places, 4. དགེ་བ་སེར་སྣ་ stinginess with virtuous deeds, 5. རིགས་ལ་སེར་སྣ་
stinginess to one's caste or lineage.
BG



boo The Six Brothers: Chapter Two be
.
If we meet destitute ones who are bold enough to beg,
For the purpose of increasing our merit we have gained
the most.
If I am able to give away even my head, eyes, hands and feet,
And my own life, then needless to say,
I can give away my children, wife and pointless pleasures.
Indeed, there is nothing at all that wise people!
can not give away!
we
If all one's possessions are given to the poor,
The sublime glories of both this existence and nirvana 07
will be obtained.
So meritorious merchandise such as generosity
is deserving of praise.
However, this conduct is not within the scope of the miserly
and selfish.
The fire of sorrow, which is fuelled by the sighs of beggars
Who have been sent away having had their hopes dashed,
Burns the tree of one's honour.
Ignorant ones who act like this, though alive, they are really
dead.
Generosity is the conquering hero of non-virtue,
A wishing tree that fulfils one's hopes,
A great drum that echoes forth all one's great qualities, and
A treasure of karmic merit which never runs out.” :
In reply to this, the three older brothers could say nothing at all.
106 anni in this context is a reference to those who are experts in the conduct of
Bodhisattvas.
107 and is a reference to being released from cyclical existence and entering nirvana.
ng in this context refers to worldly existence.



book The Six Brothers: Chapter Two Ser
wa
AWWWWWWWWWW
The heroically generous give to poor guests even more
than they could wish for.
In looking after themselves, the miserly do not even dare to
eat or drink.
Oh my! The difference between excellent and vile behaviour
is beyond imagination -
It is greater than the distance between the heavens and the
earth108
W
WWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWW
As the great elephant 109 pulls the chariot of the commanders
of Indra "land repels the demigod's warfare, !!!
So the mighty,"? with powerful shoulders,
are able to bear the great burden of freeing all migrators.
Like foxes dragging their tails along the ground,'.
So the weak are tired and lazy even when it comes to looking
after themselves.
WWWWWWWW
Proceeding on in an easterly direction, the brothers eventually arrived
at a palace called SUPREME VICTORY 114 which belonged to a king
named Yukhor Gyon." Surrounding the palace were many parks.
Encircling the parks were seven trenches full of beautiful, clean water
and were decorated by rows of palm trees. There were seven
protective walls and seven separate clusters of houses surrounding the
palace area. In the middle of this there was a jewelled mansion like
one from the divine realm. Inside this mansion lived the king, his
108
08 T a' is a metaphor for 'sky' or 'heavens'. It is not referring to the Milky
Way as this is 5 päeva tarat or warm
10919925935ši is an honorific title for an elephant, also sometimes written as
རབ་བརྟན་སྤྲིན་གྲོལ་ or ས་ལ་རབ་བརྟན་
110 8595' is also known as Kaushika or Devendra.
yaraq are constantly engaged in warfare.
11? སྙིང་སྟོབས་ལྡན་རྣམས་
11325995' s is an unusual expression meaning 'to go'.
114 249495S":
Ils waai is one of the kings of the four continents of Buddhist cosmology, but
in this context is simply the king's name.
119 gay also spelled 5* is a palm or banana tree.
34



voor The Six Brothers: Chapter Two per
many queens, his closest personal attendants"? and his ministers.
They all enjoyed the highest happiness, with delightful words and
singing and dancing filling the mansion. SON OF DESIRE, being
captivated by such splendour, said,
“Look! What marvellous good fortune of
This extravagantly wealthy kingdom.
Even by spending the merchandise of merit,
More than what is here can not be obtained in the
three realms. 118
The abode of the gods'19 called 'Mount Meru', /20
Which is surrounded by glorious golden mountains and
The seven lakes of leisure,27
Is here in this place and nowhere else!
Being so laden with jewellery,
The precious multi-storied celestial mansion
Of the Victorious Palace 22 of the gods ...
Has fallen down to earth right here.
If birds of the divine gardens/23
Saw these beautiful parks
1170057 T B means one's closest associates or assistants.
118 gaya (org5 raya) are the three realms of existence.
These are: 1. ལྷའི་སྲིད་པ་ the realm of the gods, 2. མིའི་སྲིད་པ་ the realm of people,
3. ཀླུའི་སྲིད་པ་ the realm of nagas or serpents.
Il སྐབས་གསུམ་གནས་
120 g Mt. Meru, which is in the centre of the four continents in Buddhist
cosmology.
121 Karna 957 the seven 'leisure' or 'amusement' lakes are: 1. the salt
lake, 2. v the beer lake 3. op the water lake, 4. Samas the milk
lake, 5. Samas the yoghurt lake, 6. the butter lake, 7. 45 am the
honey lake. There are seven golden mountains 47 7 959, but the text does not
explicitly say 'seven'.
12༸ ལྷ་ཡི་ཁང་བཟང་རྣམ་པར་རྒྱལ་
123 5919 is a reference to the gardens of the gods.



WERNIAWAWALA AWAAN
U
"
.
.
The Six Brothers: Chapter Two oo
Filled with trees and flowers,
Even they would become as humble as the poor.
Since all virtuous ones have been born
In this peaceful and prosperous place,
Perhaps the neighbourhoods of the divine realm 124
Are now empty?
This Lovely Looking City 125 of the world,
This king of the people Indra,120
This divine realm of the earth,127
Steal away the pride of the gods. 28
The abundance of jewels in these treasuries
Puts the Naga king '29 to shame.
The courageous and daring military
Want to conquer even the hordes of warring demigods.150
The king's commands dwell above 131
His thousand kingdoms
With a mere glance from him and just a few words,
It is amazing how the people accomplish their work.
If the Lord of Wealth "saw such riches,
Even his arrogance would disappear.
124 Ralg Tag
125 ལྟ་ན་སྔག་ is a reference to གྲོང་ཁྱེར་ལྟ་ན་སྔག་ the abode of the chief Vedic god Indra,
located on the summit of Mt. Meru, in the centre of the four continents of Buddhist
cosmology.
126 AT GT' is literally 'the one with a thousand eyes' and is an epithet of Indra,
the chief Vedic god of India.
1?? ས་ལ་གནས་ in this context is not a reference to the dwelling place of Bodhisattvas
once they have passed from cyclical existence.
128 para is the heavenly dwelling of Brahma, Vishnu and Shiva, though in this
context it is a reference to the divine realm.
129 གདེངས་ཅན་བདག་པོ་ is a title of the Naga king,
130 gaiq demigods are constantly engaged in warfare with each other.
131
h onagaganap is literally on top of the head commands rest”. This is
an expression used for showing great respect to a higher authority.
138
36



Bon The Six Brothers. Chapter Two 201
Though we are born as humans, we are destitute. 33
Though intelligent, we have no power.
Though alive, we are really dead.
Though having food, it is tasteless.
Though clothed, we are really naked.
Though having human bodies, we are really hungry
ghosts.134
www
In the joyful mansion, the king is served with great respect
by his ministers and his commands rule over the land.
He wears the fine clothes of happiness and much precious
jewellery, being fully satisfied by wonderful food.?").
On the lion throne, 136 the king enjoys lying together with
beautiful women, being woken only by the sound of the
lute.'
Wealth such as this does not exist in the three realms, 198
but if I could have a fraction of it, even if only in a dream,
I would still wish for it.”
GREAT UNDERSTANDING, wanting to overcome SON OF DESIRE'S
cravings, said in poetic verse,
“Friends, listen to me. Let go of the noose of desire!
Be satisfied with what you have.
132 ལུས་ངན་བུ་ is also known as རྣམ་ཐོས་སྲས་ The Lord of Wealth is one of the four
great kings, ruling over the northern region. He is also known as the ruler of the
95555, (from the Sanskrit ‘yaksa'), the malevolent, harmful demons.
133 is rebirth as a human, which is considered a high and desirable rebirth.
The Son of Desire is saying that compared to what he is seeing, humans, though
having a high rebirth, are poor,
134 û mn' or 'pretas'.
135 F25 literally means one hundred flavours' and is an expression used to describe
food being very delicious with meaning ‘many' or 'much'.
136 mag' is a throne supported by eight carved lions. This type of throne
represents the fearlessness of a Victorious One.
157 505 literally means 'many strings' referring to either a sitar or lute..
1599 (See foonote 119.)
37



WYNIRWANAWAWALAUS dolls
WWW.
UUUUU
Vo The Six Brothers: Chapter Two me
Riches are the source of much suffering,'s,
Contentment is the source of great bliss.
Pleasures are like a deadly 140 poison:
At first they are very delicious, yet later they bring misery.
However much you drink you are never satisfied,
and furthermore
Desire increases like being unquenched by salty water.
Like butterflies, the ones attracted to the fire-light *l of desire
Are burnt in both this life and the next.142
Like bees protecting honey,
They have the misery of collecting, protecting and
losing their wealth!
The pleasures of the poor and the rich are very different.
So too is the suffering they each must bear.
Those pressed down by a mountain of gold are destroyed,
Those wearing bark clothing remain happy.
Each and every suffering of the people
Must be born by the king.
Everyone needs food and clothes to live;
More than this, even the king does not enjoy.
King Yukhor Gyon's body and mind never rest, 143
' Being occupied with the worry of guarding against enemies.
Even though the name 'king' is honourable,
In fact, he is really the slave of all.
139.5 54 literally hundreds but also means 'many' or ‘much'.
140 2795 to destroy or 'eliminate or ‘kill'. 95" is also another name for
གཤིན་རྗེ་ཆོས་རྒྱལ་ the Lord of Death.
141 Saz is a metaphor for 'fire'.
142 Q ' means both this life and the next rebirth.
143 maaga means that both the body and mind are tired, or that the body is tired
and the mind is anxious.



boo The Six Brothers: Chapter Two com
After the seed of merit, which can produce the ripe fruit
of complete liberation,
Is burnt by the fire of ignorance,
Ashes of fleeting pleasures sprout forth -
These being pointless, cause meritorious karma to be lost.
Worldly pleasures!44have a destructive end,
Even long lasting riches will one day certainly be destroyed.
Riches are inherently fleeting, impermanent and deceptive -
So overcome the desire for riches which are nothing but
straw."
In this manner, GREAT UNDERSTANDING tried to stop the cravings of
the three older brothers with pertinent and logical reasoning.
However, since their desires had been habituated for such a long time,
they had become hardened like a stone carving of the stone realm, 45
and so their desires could not be overcome.
Beside the king's palace was a great house designated to charity. That
afternoon, the ministers appointed to this charitable work gave to the
destitute whatever they wanted. So in this way, like a great wish-
fulling tree the suffering of the poor was alleviated. Upon seeing this,
the three elder brothers' craving for riches became so great that they
set off to go and beg. Then LOVING KINDNESS said, "What is this?
If you do not like the practice of generosity
How is it that you now admire those who give?
You who are full of anger when beggars come,
How is it that you go and beg from others?”.
The three younger brothers rested there under a leafy tree, engaging
themselves in spiritual conversation. The three older brothers went to
the house of charity to receive some gifts. But the king's ministers
gave them only a small amount of goods. Being so greedy they were
not satisfied at all and became very upset. They then went to another
144 15:59 a refers to the pleasures or happiness of cyclical, samsaric existence.
145 Eagan the stone realm is not a specific place in Buddhist cosmology. .
39



boo The Six Brothers: Chapter Two gover
of the king's treasuries and started to steal things. As they were so
insatiable, they took a great heap of jewels .- more than they could
even carry. Their load was so heavy that it pressed down on them and
they could not escape quickly. Noticing the thieves, the treasury
guards seized them and tied up the three brothers’ hands like tying up
a bunch of lotus flowers. They bound the brothers' feet in iron
shackles and put them in prison with many other criminals. And they
remained there in misery.
Then, shortly afterwards, King Yukhor Gyon, riding upon a great,
snow mountain-like46 elephant, '47 with the assembly of ministers
holding victory banners and large fans, 48 came forth from the palace.
He then sat down on the jewelled throne of the great house of charity,
and, like Indras giving out gifts, gave to all the beggars until they
were completely satisfied. With his large lotus-like eyes the king
looked around and noticed three destitute looking youths, sitting under
the shade of a nearby tree. Seeing that they did not come to beg and
were content to just stay there, the king was both surprised and
suspicious. So he sent a messenger to summon them to him. The king
then asked them,
“Who are you; the ones who are very poor
Yet do not know how to beg?
Do you not know about my generosity? Or,
Perhaps your wishes were not fulfilled and you are
disappointed?”
The brothers prostrated and said,
146 ang is not referring to Mount Kailash in this context, but to the grandeur of
snow mountains in general.
147 mangas995 is literally 'lord of two drinks’, being a metaphor for elephant.
Elephants were named this way because they can drink twice, first through their trunk
and then through their mouths.
148 EU is not referring to a yak's tail or a big drum or 'the father of tails' but rather
a large fan used for fanning royalty. རྔ་ཡབ་ is also spelled རྫ་གཡབ་ .
9 བརྒྱ་བྱིན་ is an epithet of Indra and is synonymous with ལྷ་དབང་པོ་བརྒྱ་བྱིན་
40



boo The Six Brothers: Chapter Two Roer
"Your majesty, your great drum-like?" generosity and
Your high victory banner of glorious merit
Are like the fame of the sun in the three realms -
To all this, who would not be amazed?
But we are really not poor, rather
We live very happily under your kindness.
Since we gave to beggars whatever they wanted,
We have become like this."
When the king heard!! these excellent words and saw such
outstanding behaviour he was truly delighted. So he gave them his
very own clothes, which were like gods' robes worth millions of gold
coins. He also gave them precious jewellery. Placing them on the
great elephant's carriage, he took them into the holy palace. The king
then sat them down on the soft cushions of a golden throne fit for a
king. The throne was elevated by carved lions and had legs made of
red sandalwood decorated with many jewels. The three brothers were
respectfully waited upon, being served with an abundance of very
delicious and nutritious food132 and drink. With great admiration 153
the king then faced them saying,
"Blessed ones, with faces like full moons,154
Seeing you has made the lake of my heart sparkle.
In order to open the water lilies of great happiness,
iso gatazt a great drum of generosity'. The imagery here is of a great drum
that echoes forth the king's fame.
Ish In literary Tibetan, the verb a s can be used to mean to see, to hear, to taste, to
feel and to know.
152 Finska ansa'literally 'food having a hundred flavours..
153 555 wag literally the face of faith'. There are three kinds of faith -
དད་པ་གསུམ་ These are: 1. དང་བའི་དད་པ་ admiring faith, 2. ཡིད་ཆེས་ཀྱི་དད་པ་ trusting
faith, 3. avžanš50554 longing faith. (There is also a fourth kind of faith
known as
g a g5 irreversible faith.)
134 oparo y is a metaphor for 'beauty', 'beautiful appearance' or 'face'.
154



bud
w.
WAWHARA LULULAULUWULUI,
brico The Six Brothers: Chapter Two yer
Why don't you shine forth moonbeams of eloquent
teachings.2/5.5
If you meet holy ones, you will increase in wisdom;
Being friendly toward them, you will obtain
hundreds of good qualities.
So, in order to bless us
Please illuminate us through the light of the dharma."
Hearing this GREAT UNDERSTANDING thought, "If my pleasing words
appeal to the king, then through the teaching of the dharma virtue and
goodness will increase”. So with a voice like a clear sounding bell he
said in reply,
"In your presence, great king,
How, when all the people are occupied
With proclaiming your great virtues, : .
Can one such as I say anything meaningful to you?
By your great power
You have taken complete control of this land -
Which is as wonderful as the glorious elephant Sasung 156
Carrying his jewelled carriage.
1maga are 'elegant teachings or sayings', 'good explanations', 'moral
lessons" or aphorisms”.
156 ཕྱོགས་ཀྱི་གླང་པོ་ is a reference to གླང་ཆེན་ས་སྲུང༌ the elephant of the divine realm who
is one of the dr the eight mythological elephants which guard the
world. Sasung has a white body, seven great body parts (four legs, one trunk, one pair
of ears and one tail), six tusks and a red head. The chief Vedic god Indra (E555 )
rides upon this elephant. The eight elephants are: 1.4955 2.215577
3. stā šova 4. vžba 5: 5. 6.
7. 0968. F'NÈA" ( vians is also the name of the great master of the
Buddhist tradition who lived in India during the later part of the 6th century. He was
one of the six great masters of the འཛམ་གླིང་མཛེས་པའི་རྒྱུན་དྲུག་)



bo The Six Brothers: Chapter Two per
Like a crown decorated with gems,
So your commands are worthy and appropriate.
Are there any kings who
Do not place them on their heads? 157
In the earth and the sky
You and the sun are very beautiful.
In the sky, the sun outshines the stars.
Upon the earth, you overcome arrogant rulers.
Hearing about you, evil people and
Nocturnal birds is'flee, but
All the virtuous goodness of migrators and
Lotus gardens flourish.
Like comparing snow mountains to Mount Meru........
Streams to the ocean,
Trees to the divine wish-fulfilling tree'60
Who can be compared with you?
You
Your great, insurmountable power
Is like the power of the wind at the end of the age, 161
Causing, I imagine, your enemies to say as they tremble,
"We will be destroyed in an instant!'
Your merit and riches flourish greatly and
The renown of your great precepts
157 literally 'the top of the head', being a way of expressing respect. These two
lines mean 'who are the kings who do not place the crown of the king's commands on
their head?
158 འབྱུང་པོའི་བྱ་nocturnat bird is synonymous with སྲིན་བྱ་ sdemon bird. འབྱུང་པོའི་བྱ་
are known by many other names such as 679 agguag Qarraga ETS :
ཉིན་མོ་ཡིབ། ཉིན་མོར་དགའ་བྲལ། མིག་སེར་ཅན་
isang
100 og 5 is synonymous with quake
1615 araas is the great wind that will destroy the world at the end of time. It will
be preceded by a great, final fire known as 50'agama
43
..!



S
weeWoWUWWW.
LLLLLLLLLWWLWWU.
"
.
.."
The Six Brothers: Chapter Two ser
Completely fill the three realms 162
Stealing away any chance of evil behaviour.
Your virtues are bunches of saffron. 63
Writing brushes of your fame, having
Been soaked with the water of your generosity,
Write millions of lines about your virtues and goodness.
You, who are even greater than the sky,
Deeper than even the immeasurable ocean, 64
More steadfast than even Mount Meru
May you become even greater than Indra!”165
The king was totally delighted with these sweet sounding words and
smiling to GREAT UNDERSTANDING, who had spoken on behalf of the
others, he said, “Oh friend, you who have such a wise and lucid mind,
why do you praise me so much? You have told all about my good
virtues. Now, please explain the teachings of the dharma and clearly
show the way of the paths of the two learnings. "I GREAT
UNDERSTANDING, knowing that the king had a sincere mind, worthy
of being a receptacle of the dharma, said to his two brothers,
"As the sun and moon's rays
Make clear day and night,
16°འཇིག་རྟེན་གསུམ་པོ་ are the three realms or spheres of existence. They are commonly
abbreviated as སྲིད་པ་གསུམ་ or ས་གསུམ་ The three are: 1. ལྷའི་སྲིད་པ་ the god realm,
2. ཀླུའི་སྲིད་པ་ the naga realm, 3. མིའི་སྲིད་པ་ the human realm.
16 གུར་ཀུམ་ is also known as གུར་གུམ་ and is a transliteration from the Sanskrit word
*kung kuma'. Arimar is found in Kashmir, Nepal and Tibet T7 Tay has the qualities
of sweetness and coolness. Two of its many medicinal uses are: 1. as an agent to
help pump blood to the liver and 2. for stopping hemorrhages. Tot is known by
many other names stich as འཇམ་དབྱངས་མདོག་ and དྲི་ཞིམ་
16* དཔག་པར་དཀའ་ literally *difficult to estimate or guess». ཆུ་གཏེར་ is a metaphor for
ocean.
165 25 go
16 གཙུག་ལག་གཉིས་ are the two leanings of worldly existence and emancipation from
earthly samsaric' existence.



bo The Six Brothers: Chapter Two Ber
So the two learnings make clear.
The distinction between liberation and samsara.?07
Please offer to the king
The precious words of truth.
If the king becomes rich in the dharma,
All of his subjects will live in bliss.”
After hearing this, LOVING KINDNESS spoke pertinently about the
worldly system of learning lo$ in poetic verse,
"Your majesty, riches, palaces, queens and royal officials
Do not make a king great, but rather
The true adornments of a king are
Commands in accord with the dharma which rule
the land well.
The special characteristics of the sea are not
Lines of waves decorated with foam necklaces, but rather
The sea is made glorious by its vast, immeasurable depths,
And because it is the origin of precious jewels.
As generosity makes one prosperous,
Gentleness makes one exalted, 10% and
Wise words make one as wise as the elderly,
So, conduct in accordance with the dharma makes
a king great.
And having completely removed the tarnish of imperfections,
The clear mirror of the king's understanding will see,
With the eyes of discernment, the reflection
Of the difference between right and wrong behaviour.
167 9555875
168 འཇིག་རྟེན་ལུགས་ཀྱི་གཙུག་ལག་
16 མངོན་པར་མཐོ་བ་ refers to a higher rebirth or higher existence of either a human or
god.
45



V
A
LKAVAVAVAH ..LV
bago The Six Brothers: Chapter Two ger
Forsake laziness and impudence, ..
Rule the kingdom by being vigilant and alert!'70
When the people become impudent, the gods
Will stop the rain and crops will dry up:
If those who have their hope in you ,
Enjoy the nectar of your kindness,' ;.
They will beat the drum of your fame
With the drumstick of gratitude.
When thorns of jealousy
Fuel great fires'?) of dissent,
By the wind of divisive words,
The harvests of benefit and bliss are burnt.
..
At that time, cover your impartial sky-like heart
With the clouds of discernment
Making peace by the rain of your ..
Ingenious nectar-like commands!
Not believing intimate words is wrong,
but it is also wrong to trust too easily.
Not loving your kin and subjects is wrong,
but it is also wrong to show too much loving kindness."
Discarding work that needs to be done is wrong,..
but it is also wrong to do things in a confused way,
without first investigating them.
Saying things that you can not achieve is wrong,
but it is also wrong to say things you:
can achieve and not do them.
170 graag means to guard your heart and mind closely and to be watchful, aware,
attentive, alert and vigilant.
I" ་གདོང་ is a reference to a volcanic island in the southern Indian ocean which has
the shape of a horse's face. It is known by two another names 15 araw and
རྡོ་རྗེའི་རི་. It is said that the རྟ་གདོང་མེ་ will be the great fire that emanates from under
the sea and will occur at the end of the age. m5 is also a metaphor for fire. .
17? ཚོད་ལས་བརྒལ་བའི་བྱམས་པ་ means to go beyond the measure of appropriate loving
kindness.
46



.
X
body The Six Brothers: Chapter Two mer
Thoughtless words, unrestrained behaviour,
pride and deception are all wrong.
Please separate yourself from the stain of these flaws:
and also remove the wrongs of this world.
Honour your parents, the knowledgeable,
the gracious, the elderly and guests."
Do not mistreat those lacking in knowledge, 4 the poor,
the sick and defeated enemies.
Do not be satisfied with the knowledge you have,
and diligently spread the two learnings.173
Establish the highest qualities in all people;
be peaceful and gentle, and speak pleasant words. ..
Behaving in this way, you and your subjects
will be completely free from all harm;
Merit and riches will multiply everywhere!76
being like the Tsogden era. "177
After this, in accordance with the Buddhahood lineage of the king, 178
VIRTUOUS further elaborated the teachings of the dharma!' saying in
poetic verse,
173 and guests' or 'visitors' who have come from far away.
174 ngak' in this context refers to those lacking in knowledge or understanding,
not those without virtue or lacking in good qualities.
11 a ag gav are the two learnings of 1. worldly existence
£6909 and 2. freedom from samsara za mauv...,
19 a literally means 'ten directions' and is an expression meaning
'everywhere'.
!?? 2959 the complete' or 'perfect' era, is the first era of the four eras of
existence. This is a time of great bliss, long life, no feuding and no suffering. The four
eras, known as the བསྐལ་པའི་དུས་བཞི་ are: 1. རྫོགས་ལྡན་གྱི་དུས་ the complete era,་
2. གསུམ་ལྡན་གྱི་དུས་ the three-foid era, 3. གཉིས་ལྡན་གྱི་དུས་ the two-fold era,་་་
4. རྩོད་ལྡན་གྱི་དུས་ the era of strife.
178 Ray in this context is a reference to the family lineage of future buddhahood.
There are five Buddha families or lineages of migrators: 1. Sa (also known
as སངས་རྒྱས་རིགས་) the Buddha lineage, 2. རྡོ་རྗེའི་རིགས་ the vajra lineage, 3.རིན་ཆེན་
རིགས་ the jewel lineage, 4. པདྨ་རིགས་ the lotus lineage, 5. ལས་རིགས་ the karma lineage.
47



&W
H AVANESAKIT
...
..
HAHAAH
.
.
.
Voo The Six Brothers: Chapter Two Per
“In the mansion of kingdoms
Staircases of both good and evil conduct exist.
One ascends to the place of emancipation,'$0
One descends into the pit of the lower realms.'8l
180
Fleeting and impermanent pleasures
Remove previously accumulated merit.
For the sake of kingdoms and one's renown
Terrible negativity is accumulated, leading to hell.182
Giving away everything for the sake of the dharma,
Abandoning all desire, craving, evil and deception,
And performing great virtuous deeds will rapidly bring
Merit to completion, leading to the divine realm. 183
Therefore, if you totally abandon evil,
Increase the happiness of migrators, and spread
the teachings, '84
You will achieve your goals in this life and the next,
Obtaining both the splendour of this existence
and the glory of nirvana.
Always sincerely make offerings to the Three Jewels
and generously satisfy the destitute.
Establish in your subjects the way of the ten virtues 83
and with kindness and compassion help others.
179 ný ALTEA
180 gr a literally “the village of emancipation'.
181 CTTT means 'bad' or evil migration'. Also known as *** An evil migration
consists of entering into the lower realms of either 55'9" animals, âgapy" pretas
(hungry ghosts), or garg hell-beings. This is in contrast to 55 AM - the higher
realms or good/happy migrations. These three desirable rebirths are a humans,
gods and earug demigods ;
182 5 garming literally 'fall into hell”.
183
c ar is the higher rebirth of humans, gods and demigods, but in this context is
also referring to freedom from samsara.
184 gsg the doctrines or teachings of the Buddha. Also often written as
སངས་རྒྱས་བསྟན་པ་
48



14. The Six Brothers: Chapter Two be
Abandon sin, deception, evil deeds and live.
without anger and pride.
If you act in this way, your kingdom will enjoy peace and the
glory of the divine realm, and ultimately liberation will
be attained.
dem som meisimintina
Alternatively, what do you want with this
Seductive, impermanent and pointless kingdom?
Even by staying alone in a forest you could
Single-mindedly achieve enlightenment."187
calidad de andre siden var en av
al
soci
Hearing these beneficial and liberating words, it was as if the joy and
amazement of the king's heart were rivalling each other and so his
face bloomed. Smiling he said,
and
besar series
duvawwwwwwwwwwww
“Like swans!88landing and
Streams descending,
So these true words of my friends
Have entered the clear lake of my heart.
Who does not crave the food of gods2109
Who does not accept wise words?
The gift of wealth is plentiful, but
Encountering the gift of the dharma is rare indeed.
As payment for the teachings of the two learnings
Enjoy my kingdom together with me.
arsuddetto che con
1855019'as the ten virtues are: 1. jaar not to take life, 2. argit
མི་ལེན་པ་ not to take what you are not given, 3. ལོག་གཡེམ་སྤོང་པ་ to abandon sexual
misconduct, 4. བདེན་པར་སྨྲ་བ་ to speak the truth, 5, ཕྲ་མ་མི་བྱེད་པ་ not to slander;
6. ཚིག་འཇམ་པོ་སྨྲ་བ་ to speak gentle words, 7. ངག་མི་འཆལ་བ་ not to say pointless
things. 8.995T
not to covet another's property,
9.4@g mo avvale not to harm others, 10. 0554 ' to uphold pure
doctrines
W
186 g5
187 35
1885 ST
189 555 22av literally "nectar food' but this is a metaphor for the food of the gods.
azimowe w
L



bogo The Six Brothers: Chapter Two go
Later on, again with your wise words, 190
Make our good fortune complete.”
At that time LOVING KINDNESS, because he loved his other brothers,
went outside and asked where they had gone. After seeing their
suffering, he went back inside with a sad heart. Since he had
stopped smiling, the king asked him what had happened at such a time
of happiness. LOVING KINDNESS told the king in detail why he was
sad and what had happened. Then the king asked GREAT
UNDERSTANDING, on behalf of the other brothers, “Holy friends, you
who have such excellent qualities, do you also have brothers who are
in such a wicked state as this?" GREAT UNDERSTANDING replied,
"Your majesty, we most certainly do have brothers like this - :
Burning in desire and impudent, with obscured minds,
Performers of hundreds of evil deeds, three brothers we have.
Like trying to change the course of a raging waterfall,
I, with great effort, could not correct them.
However, to those who are overcome by their own sins,
It is better to forgive! than it is to punish.
For further increasing your fame and merit
Please release the prisoners.”
The king said, “Holy ones, whose shadows we would not even step
across,"º how could I cause harm to your brothers? So now I will
release all the prisoners taken captive here."
190 a và ba"
191 goda
1925 in this context refers to 'forgiveness but could also be translated 'tolerance',
*perseverance' or 'forbearance'.
19a གྲིབ་མའང་འགོང་བར་མི་རིགས་ ༤should not cross over even (your)shadow*. འགོང་བ་ in
this context means 'to cross over' or 'pass over'. In traditional Tibetan culture it is
highly offensive to step on or across someone's shadow, particularly the shadow of a
parent, teacher, monk or high lama. In the same way, it is also disrespectful to cast a
shadow on scriptures, letters, thangkas and sacred objects.



bo o The Six Brothers: Chapter Two cer
Broms
Then, in accordance with the king's command, the ministers declared
freedom!94 to the prisoners and thousands of prisoners were released.
Words of rejoicing filled the land. The three older brothers were then
summoned to the palace. SON OF DESIRE was given the chance to be a
king's musician. VIOLENCE was appointed as a door keeper and
DARKNESS was assigned to look after the gardens.
The great younger brothers, in obedience to the king's command
stayed there many days and taught the traditions of the
commentaries, 19 the branches of learning, 'Yand the eighteen arts and
sciences."97 The brothers also allowed the king and all his attendants to
takes the vows of the eight branches of absolutions. They in turn,
being completely satisfied, made offerings to the brothers. After the
king and his retinue paid great respect to them, the brothers returned
to their home land.
HOWTIMINGIRINGINGIRINGI IRRicini
194 @REAN ay is literally “a fearless/non-frightening announcement”.
195 ལུགས་ཀྱི་བསྟན་བཅོས་
196 རིག་པའི་གནས་ is synonymous with རིག་གནས་. In this context refers to
རིག་གནས་ཆེ་བ་ལྔ་དང་ཆུང་བ་ལྔ་ the five major and five minorbranches of learning. The
five major branches are: 1. བཟོ་རིག་པ་ arts and crafts, 2. གསོ་བ་རིག་པ་ medicine,
3.924 grammar/language, 4.5598 Tala logic, 5.45571er
Buddhist philosophy, The five minor branches are: 1. T y poetry, 2. w aza
synonyms, 3. སྡེབ་སྦྱོར་ literary composition, 4. སྐར་རྩིས་ astrology; 5. ཟློས་གར་dance
and drama.
19791595a 5 27955' are more commonly known as the wayangya95
the eighteen Vedic learnings or the eighteen arts and sciences. These are: 1. Farar
music, 2. འཁྲེག་འཐབ་ amorous skills, 3. སོ་ཚིས་ domestic work, 4.གྲངས་ཅན་
mathematics, 5. y grammar/language, 6.217 medicine, 7. JANGAN religion,
8. *** arts and crafts, 9.26535' archery, 10.6159&ty logic, 11.39 TTT
pharmacology, 12. 559459self-discipline, 13. aver59contemplation,
14. aa595 astronomy, 15. By astrology, 16.24agjai magic, 17. jaar
ancient history, 18. jagaĚ5'' ancient expressions.
198019715 in this context means 'to allow or let someone do something?:
1996299485a is synonymous with a ua985 being the
name of a set of eight vows taken by the laity usually for the period of one day. One
vows not to participate in: 1. 31045 killing, 2. van stealing,
3. མི་ཚངས་སྤྱོད་ sexual misconduct, 4. རྫུན་སྨྲ་ lying, 5. ཆང་འཐུང་ drinking alcohol,
6. 'Egil sitting in a high seat, 7. 194559 singing, dancing and wearing
jewellery, 8.5araan (eating) afternoon food.
3
W
in
c hirix Wisin Viim
si
Mini-



The Six Brothers: Chapter Two for
The wish-fulfilling tree 200 of generosity, which has become
the glory of the blessed divine realm,201
Oh, how deserving of praise it is --
Courageous, immoveable roots, branches full of the power
to give, the beautiful garland of leaves of contentment,
The shining flowers of intelligence, the benefit and
bliss of its vast cool shade saving the afflicted from
torment, and
The perfectly ripened fruit of merit which remove people's
poverty by precious wish-fulfilling generosity.
In summary, the suffering of birth is very terrifying for all migrators.
As for desire itself, it does not bring prosperity but rather it causes
one's downfall. I give praise to the virtue of contentment. I also
praise the great exalted ones, 202 who, through the giving of material
things, the teaching of the dharma and the giving of boldness,209 help
all migrators!
This is chapter two.
2སྦྱིན་པའི་དཔག་བསམ་ཤིང་
201 paina yaifa is a reference to F4 - the divine realm of the gods. The wish-
fulfilling tree is in the divine realm.
20༠ བདག་ཉིད་ཆེན་པོ་ is an epithet of Bodhisattvas and Buddhas.
203 The author makes explicit the three aspects of the perfection of generosity
practiced by Bodhisattvas: 1. zasieget the giving of material things,
2. ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྦྱིན་པ་ the giving of the dharma, 3. མི་འཇིགས་པའི་སྦྱིན་པ་ the giving of
fearlessness.



N
AAN
:
CHAPTER THREE
HE
And then gradually the season of summer arrived.
Lady Lightning 204 closely embraces the summer season
And thus all beings become passionate.
It is as if the Creator 20% has given the beautiful 206 and
Those drunk with desire, a chance to play.
Blown by light breezes, 207 the soft, new grass covering
the ground
Appears to form moving lines.
It is as though the ground is competing with the beauty
Of the closely formed ripples of the wish-fulfilling lake.
Blue lakes, which are pure like sapphires, 208
And covered with white flowers,
Look like 209 the blue 210 sky girl who wears
The beautiful necklace of newly formed clouds. 21)
Team
The vast pure sky,
With its brightly shining stars,
Is as beautiful as a land
That is full of clusters of villages.
204 daag is a metaphor for 'lightning based on the fact that lightning has the
ability to make holes when it strikes. pomys5 is also a metaphor for 'wind' or 'air
and is the name of a mountain range in India.
20s བྱེད་པོ་ is an epithet of Brahma (ཚངས་པ་), who is a considered to be the creator of
the world in the pre-Buddhist religion of ancient India.
2015 2155 is a reference to beautiful young women.
207 I are cool winds or light, fresh breezes.
208 wataar is a transliteration of the Sanskrit word 'Indranlla', being the gem
sapphire.
209 ENT'Q in this context means to be 'like' or 'similar'.
210 šanca is also one of the many epithets of the sky, but in this context refers to
the colour 'blue'.
21 To literally 'holding water', is a metaphor for 'clouds'.
53



.
.
.
Bogor The Six Brothers: Chapter Three soe
LAR..Sealine
The sharp and blazing rays of the summer sun 212
Melt the emerald 213 sky and, like falling droplets,
Fill the atmosphere with the nectar of rain
Cleansing the earth4from dust.
When young clouds drunk with nectar,
Which are endowed with the clear, golden garland
of lightning,
Play the lute of pleasant sounding thunder,
Ecstatic peacocks also dance.
ASANSOURIAN SOMA
Clear, pure bathing pools
Full of elephants 215drunk with arrogance,
Appear to be competing with the sky
Full of irritated black 216 rain clouds.
Urged on by great drums 297 of light winds
attractive young trees, made rich by the wealth of their
leaves, and who possess
Lover Earth 218 - with her beautiful green clothes and
garlands of flowers,
Perform dances, and entranced young bumble bees
Also enjoy themselves immensely by singing love songs.
MWAMAKUWA MTWT
At this time, the brothers wanted to experience anew the joy of this
scene and so departed from their house. While they were going along
in a southerly direction, beside a wall next to the road, there was an
old man who was one hundred years old. The elderly man was unable
to bear the great burden of the suffering of old age and was thus
212. is a metaphor for the sun.
213 7 015' or 295" is a precious green coloured gem. In this context it is a metaphor
for rain as the element water is symbolised by the colour green....
214 5016 a g literally 'one clothed in the sea' is a metaphor for the earth. #
21* གཉིས་འཐུང་
216 sat literally 'blue', but is used to describe many different colours.
217 literally clay drum' but also means 'large' or 'great drum'.
21 ནོར་འཛིན་དགའ་མ་
219 čas can also mean 'bluish-green', though in this context is just the colour green.



Voo The Six Brothers. Chapter Three movie
greatly fatigued. His ugliness and weakness was such that it could
rival that of a hungry ghost.
:
:
:.
Upon seeing this, LOVING KINDNESS was overcome by a great burden
of compassion and kindness. He was like one who was unable to
shake off the weight of his feelings and choking with tears he said,
"Oh my! Look at the terrible suffering of old age. Alas, this old man's
suffering is incredibly difficult for me to bear! It is like this,
The old man leans on his staff, yet not upon the dharma.
His hair is white, 220 yet his karmic state is not
His body is weak, yet his sin is not.
He is near death, yet not near liberation.
His hair has stolen the white clothes of his complexion.
The black hair of his youth 22 has been rubbed onto his skin.
A noose of veins 222 has bound the limbs of his body, 22 and
His veins are also bound by a net of wrinkles.
His eyes 224 see all things 22$ as being ugly, and
Having retreated inside, they see things obscurely.
His tongue 226 can not taste food.
His teeth seem as if they have gone outside and fled.
The various wrongdoings he has committed
Are drawn as lines on his face by karma's Lord of Death.227
.
.
220 NGT
to white hair,
221 W a r
is the name of a particular star, but in this context it is just referring
ne is a metaphor for 'hair'.
literally ‘forest hair. This a metaphor for the thick, black hair of a
child.
222 ** in this context refers to the protruding veins of old people.
223 wg wat refers to the 'branches' of the body, that is the four limbs of hands and
feet.
224 25aas is a metaphor for the eyes.
225 wars gaat
226 FREI literally 'taste grabberº, being a metaphor for the tongue.
227 animated
Tim



****
...............................
boo The Six Brothers: Chapter Three per
It is as if, for the purpose of taking him to the place
of execution, the white garland of flowers,
symbolising execution, 28
Has been placed on his head.”
Then VIRTUOUS said,
"His skin is so black
That it embarrasses the darkness of the night.
His emaciated and ugly body
Looks as though it wants to rival the shape of a ..
hungry ghost.229
The clear mirror of his eyes and
His discerning mind have both degenerated.
The terrible pain of old age and
The size of his goitre have both increased.
His previously accumulated seeds of merit and
The duration of his life, are both exhausted.
His sufferings of sickness and death and
The burden of sin, have both fallen upon him.
His hard and rough skin
Has become like the inside of his mind.
His body and strength are completely weak.
So, too, is the power of his virtue.”
Then GREAT UNDERSTANDING, for the purpose of showing that all
living creatures can not avoid the suffering of old age, said in poetic
verse,
228 57155902 " literally 'the killing symbol flower". According to Indian
tradition, criminals who were sentenced to death had a red flower placed on their
heads symbolising their imminent execution. In this context, the flower is white
because of the connection with the old man's white hair.
229 59 or 'preta'.



Boy The Six Brothers: Chapter Three
/
“The worst of all the degenerations of sentient beings
Is that called 'ageing'..
Which without any hesitation, like a cannibal demon
Steals your entire mind and youthfulness.
At the prime of life, a sone's calves could carry many loads,
but the aged can not carry even their own bodies.
Attractive bodies, which once stole the hearts of people,
having become ugly, are appalling even to oneself.
Very thin, smooth and pure white limbs 25 of young lovers,
become like the colour of charcoal and rough like a saw.
Minds which once could think much about performing deeds
for others, can not even discern one's own right or wrong
conduct.
n
internetini
So, before the thief of old age
Steals your youthfulness,
You should independently take care
Of your own affairs.'
The brothers then slowly made their way to a beautiful garden and
spent a long time wandering through it. The garden was full of trees
with bushy leaves and new blades of grass were budding forth
covering the ground. Many brilliant coloured flowers were also in full
blaze. The many beautiful songs of bumble bees which filled the
garden, appeared to be competing with shepherd boys 22 playing
flutes. At the very lovely and refreshing place of the asoka trees, 23
the brothers saw a beautiful young woman who appeared as though
she could rival a goddess. She was so gorgeous she looked like a new
moon which could talk.234 Together with her maid servants, she was
playing a very sweet sounding lute and singing joyful songs.
230 TAINTED
231 591Raquara
22 SITT in this context is a reference to shepherd boys who play flutes while looking
after livestock.
233 ཤིང་མྱ་ངན་མེད་པ་ is a type of tree in India called the asoka tree with long leaves and
red flowers.' 'a ' means no sorrow, mourning or suffering.
20 ཟླ་བའི་མེ་ལོང་གསར་པ་སྨྲ་ཤེས་པ་



---
bogor The Six Brothers: Chapter Three zou
Seeing this, SON OF DESIRE was completely overcome by the power of
desire and said,
"Is this new droplets of the moon,
fresh white lotuses or water crystal jewels? 235
If she is the Lord of the stars, 236
even during the day evening water lilies 23? would bloom.
If she is a fresh lotus, 238
even at night her anthers 2' and petals would be seen.
If she is a garland of water crystals, :
her nectar could cool even the great fire.” 240
In order to overcome SON OF DESIRE'S yearning GREAT UNDER-
STANDING replied,
“Much decorative jewellery does not make a precious,
well made shrine, but rather it is a seductive illusion
for all sentient beings.
Shining, radiant skin is not the moon's rays, 241
but rather the scorching bonfire of the lustful.
Very dark 242 braids of hair are not blooming petals of
the blue lotus, 24! but rather the binding noose of
the passionate.
Beautiful thin waists are not branches of the wishing tree,
but rather swords that kill liberation!"
ཆུ་ཤེལ་
2 རྒྱུ་སྐར་བདག་པོ་ is a metaphor for the moon.
'ag' is a type of water lily which opens up only at the appearance of the moon.
2389
239 47' is not a reference to the epic hero King Gesar.
2༄༅ རྟ་གདོང་ is a reference to རྟ་གདོང་མེ་ the great fire from the volcanic island in the
southern Indian ocean. This volcano looks like the shape of a horse's face and is
known by two other names; 15 mana and T. 695 can also be a
metaphor for fire in general.
241 Triggs' is literally 'the rays of the hare grabber'.
242 aža aas is the bluish-black colour of the night sky.
243 w ar is a transliteration of the Sanskrit 'uptala - the blue lotus, also known as
ཆུ་སྐྱེས་སྔོན་པོ། སའི་གདུ་བུ། དབང་མཆོག སྟེང་འཐུང་། མིག་གི་གཉེན། །



bo The Six Brothers: Chapter Three yer
Then VIRTUOUS said,
"Women of shalmali trees, 244 with their
Flourishing leaves 245 of imperfections and
Pain inducing thorns of jealousy,
Are hugged by monkeys of desire. :
Occasionally women can be even smoother than a lotus,
Sometimes they can be even rougher than a saw.
They are even more deceitful than a mirage,
Their behaviour goes downhill faster than a waterfall..
At first sight women inflame passion and
If touched, like a poisonous snake,
They will cause intolerable pain.
Association with them will immediately overcome you.
Why do you desire the rotten house of the body,
That is built with pillars of bones,
Woven together with the net of veins and tendons
Plastered with the mud of flesh, blood and excrement?
.
.
The only difference between a corpse of a
burial ground 246 and
244 gareras is a transliteration from Sanskrit. Shalmali is a tree made of iron and has
sharp razors for leaves. A forest in one of the hottest hells is comprised of these tress
and so are sometimes referred to as hell trees. It is said that enticing women dwell at
the top of the tree. When one climbs up the tree towards the women, the women :
descend. As the women are descending, sharp razors stick out from the tree, cutting
the one who is ascending.
245 waingo literally 'branches and leaves'.
246 57155 charnel or burial grounds' often in the form of sky burial sites in
Tibetan areas. There were eight major charnel grounds in ancient India. The
5765255 (also known as the 555 1995) are; 1.9559559) the
Violent One in the east, 2.35510
the Dense Wilderness in the north,
3. ནུབ་ཏུ་རྡོ་རྗེ་འབར་བ་ the Flaming Varja in the west, 4. ལྷོར་ཀེང་རུས་ཅན་ the. Skeleton
One in the south, 5.99525515915015 as the Menacing Laugh in the north-east,



------
---
--
-
-
boo The Six Brothers: Chapter Three Co
Someone who is alive is that one of them has life.
You can not see life itself 24so
Why do you desire a mere skeleton?
The polluted swamp of passion is
The place of the contempt of the learned.
So get rid of your desire
For seductive and unruly women!”
Even the hook of these helpful words could not tame those elephants
drunk with desire. As if they were entering the sea of craving, the
three older brothers walked towards the woman. Leaving VIOLENCE
and DARKNESS under a tree, SON OF DESIRE went up next to her.
As if being pulled by the hook of karma
This god of desire 248 arrived, and
Like a water lily being touched by a moonbeam
So her Pelmo-like 249 passion greatly increased.
Seeing this incredibly handsome god of desire 250
She became embarrassed and looked down,
As if her jewelled crown and
The weight of her earrings pressed down on her.
Socceeeeee.
Though she avoided him with false modesty,
Her sideways glances of desire looked again and again.
Sex
w
6.21 TAND the Auspicious Garden in the south-east,
7.97995055017 the Deep Darkness in the south-west, 8.755ana
horas the One Proclaiming Kili Kili in the north-west.
247 995 ta'uar "literally the object of your senses'... (is not life itself).
248 ལུས་མེད་ is an epithet of འདོད་ལྷ་ the god of desire, but is clearly refering to son of
Desire. ལུས་མེད་ is also known as བདུད་དགའ་རབ་དབང་ཕྱུག་ the «Demon Lord of
Love'.
249 gaart is the wife of the god of desire, who lives in a constant state of desire for
her husband. :
250 ཡིད་སྲུབས་གཟུགས་ཅན་ is an epithet of འདོད་ལྷ་ the god of desire, but also refers to
the attractive and handsome nature of Son of Desire.
e
N



vos The Six Brothers: Chapter Three zeer
Though she showed to him false grimaces of anger,
Deep in her heart she smiled joyfully.
Observing these two ravishingly charming ones,
It appeared as if they their beauty was competing
against each other.
Their age and beauty were the same
As a face and its mirror image.
Upon seeing her, SON OF DESIRE said,
"Your skin is smoother than a water lily.
Your complexion is whiter than a snow mountain.
Your eyes are more beautiful than a deer's.257
Who are you? You are something other than a human!
To we who have just arrived
You have not even given us a welcome!
You who are pretending to play the flute,
Why are you so proud?
Why do you adorn yourself with jewellery when you are so
inherently beautiful that you steal away the beauty of
a goddess?
Why do you even bother to wear makeup 252 when your white
and radiant face makes even the moonbeams embarrassed?
Why do you sing such contrived songs when the soothing
words of your beautiful voice can even surpass the
melodious voice of Brahma? 233
Why do you busily play the lute when even your natural state
can steal away the concentration of an ascetic?" 234
231 59 means 'herbivore' but in this context is a reference to .9 - a deer.
252 073 literally 'purple varnish/lacquer'. x is purple or reddish dye that is
made from the root of a certain plant. Non is also used as a general term for
cosmetics and makeup.
283 SAT is a translation of the Sanskrit word "Brahma'. Brahma is one of the three
great gods (am o wa ) of the Indian pantheon. The other two are Indra
99559 and Vishnu 39:59
..
..
..
..
...
..
..
..
.
.
..
.
..
.
..
..
.
.
.
.



boo The Six Brothers: Chapter Three per
The woman's servant said to SON OF DESIRE,
"It is so wonderful that you, one of the perfect caste 25 and
Good fortune, have come here.
As the wishing tree 256makes Mount Meru 257grand
Please make this land great.
****** encertekatuBecure WWW.
This beautiful woman 298
Comes from the sea of white churning milk and
Has been put in clothes of jewels.
She is the pleasure of Indra 2"himself.
To this fresh garden of youth
The name FLOWER TREE has been given.
How can a wonderfully painted and
Extremely delightful painting of the Creator's 260utter
even a word?
WASANII
Her bee-like eyes, her garden of blue lotus eyebrows,
Her lips, which house blooming anthers of teeth,
are red like lotus leaves,
Wanimin Winte
254 gg'al' is an epithet of the Buddha, being a translation of the Sanskrit word 'muni’.
In this context, however, it refers to 'sages' or 'ascetics' in general.
298 299 means “caste', 'family-line' or 'lineage'. In this context it is a reference to
the རིགས་བཞི་ the four castes of ancient Indian society. The four are: 1. བྲམ་ཟེའི་རིགས་
the Brahman or priestly caste, 2. རྒྱལ་རིགས་ the royal or warrior caste, 3. རྗེ་རིགས་ the
merchant or trading easte, 4. དམངས་རིགས་ or གདོལ་རིགས་ the servant or labourer
caste. (The m ain caste is considered by some scholars to be a sub-caste of
govina, being the lowest of the lowest caste and often referred to as "the
untouchables”.)
256 vaga ek is synonymous with quay sa
257 not
258 955 literally 'the eye of nectar' but is a metaphorical expression for
r
W
i
259 སྐབས་གསུམ་བདག་པོ་ is an epithet of ལྷའི་དབང་པོ་ Indra, the Lord of the gods.
260555 is an epithet of Brahma (5751), who is a considered to be the creator of
the world in the pre-Buddhist religion of ancient India.
nter i



Boom The Six Brothers: Chapter Three your
Her sweet fragrant bubble-like tika, and moving breasts
like golden geese 262
Make her equal to the glory of the wish-fulfilling lake."
FLOWER TREE's tormenting desire slowly became utterly unbearable.
Knowing that her maid servant would hinder her amorous intentions,
she called her saying, "Friend, go and pick fruit and flowers for this
newly arrived guest.” Jokingly the servant replied,
"Inflamed by the heart's rubbing sticks 263
The fire of desire is completely unbearable.
It can not be stopped by shame --
Look at how quickly it appears.
I knew about this before:
You who want to shoot to each other
Arrows of love from the bow of desire,
So why are you sending me off elsewhere?”
However, the maid said that she would go and, having said so, she
went and hid under an asoka tree and watched them. Aware of
FLOWER TREE'S amorous feelings, SON OF DESIRE said to her,
"Beautiful one, the noose of your hair
Captures the attention of my eyes 264 and
The chariot of my heart.
I am powerless to move elsewhere.
261 9a refers to the coloured, circular mark or dot on wom the forehead by Indian
women. gaar in this context is not referring to the Sanskrit grammatical marker
'bindu'
262 55°11' is synonymous with 55'N'
263 is a rubbing stick used to make fire. They are commonly used in India,
but not in Tibet.:
264 Zalogat a literally "eyes of a deer'. The imagery here is that of a deer or
wild animal staring helplessly.



Boy The Six Brothers: Chapter Three per
My body, which is ablaze with passion -
Looking as though it has been smeared with red ointment 205–
Has become as red as
Your morning sun-like 260 cheeks.
****..iabel
SMA Network
Please satisfy me by giving me
The white clothes you have touched,
The wine of your mouth perfumed with blue lotuses,
The earrings of your loving words."
Then she replied,
WWW WWW.NOVASN
"Oh my! Meeting someone such as you
How could I not receive this blessing?
How could my fruits of virtue not be ripe?
How could my merchandise of merit not be realised?
WWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWW
My body hairs of joy are standing on end so much
They put to shame grass shoots.
The radiant glow of my smile is such that
It wishes to compete with a flower garden.207
Young man, the arrow 268 of your sideways glances and
The arrow of your love 269 have simultaneously been shot.
Oh! the wound of my body and heart -
Together, they increase the pain of my love.
W
WYWWMMM
M MWWMWWWWWWWMWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWW
265 AB' is a red-yellowish pigment used in India. It is applied to the forehead of wives
as a sign of marriage and is also applied to various deities. It is known by many other
names such as; ŜRÈTE gorgon gat garant and an
206 ma is literally #youthful sun', being a metaphor for the morning sun.
267 agganap is literally “park of one hundred leaves', being a metaphor for
'flower garden'.
268 Judo literally "weapon" but in this context clearly refers to an arrow'.
2095912159 literally 'flower arrow', but is a metaphorical expression for the
arrow of desire which is shot by F agg'it: - the one possessing the arrow of
desire, being another name for the god of desire.
W
W
W



Bo The Six Brothers: Chapter Three for
It is miraculous how the moonbeams of your radiant face-
Upon which the hare image 270 is not drawn and
Which does not wax and wane --
Cause my heart to burn!
The hook of your youthful beauty
Steals away my heart and sensibilities.
I have become like immovable matter,271
So how can I serve you?
But, at an entertaining party,
Who does not completely enjoy herself?
So, as two wheels hold up a chariot, and
Both legs hold up a body, I will go with you." 272
The two of them then sat down on a crystal rock??3 in the middle of
the garden and adorned themselves with brilliant coloured flowers.
They ate perfectly ripe fruit which was like the colour of the eyes of
golden geese. They made a cool breeze by fanning themselves with
fresh leaves. Like fairies24 of the divine realm,''they exchanged
loving glances, said wonderful words to each other and amused
themselves in many different ways. FLOWER TREE sang beautiful
270 755'93 q gg is the dark area of the moon. It is said that this dark shape
looks like a rabbit or hare and is considered to be unattractive.
271 Qara inanimate matter or material thing'.
272 The meaning here is that, even though she is like a helpless statue in his presence,
Flower Tree is willing to serve Son of Desire, in the same way that wheels hold up a
chariot and legs hold up a body. (The phrase "I will go with you', is not strictly part of
the original text but has been added for clarity.)
273 E mpero is a fine crystal gem stone.
274 Zz is literally 'smell eat and is a type of being in the divine realm who lives by
eating various odours. Translating these beings as 'fairies' may not be entirely
accurate but is perhaps the closest English equivalent.
275 daigd is another name for the realm of the gods or the divine realm. It is also
referred to as the place of immortality.
65



Boy The Six Brothers: Chapter Three mer
songs and played the lute with sounds that surpassed the beautiful
singing of the Kalapinga bird.276 Praising her love she sang,
"My love, such a blessed one as this -
Perfect caste, form and manhood.
Being not of this world,
Perhaps you are a magic trick of the Creator?
Your glory makes the sun dark and
Shines in the midst of darkness.
Oh, how amazing that your glory is a nectar of the eyes
to the fortunate
But makes the unfortunate go blind!
If a new, brilliantly white cloud
Billowing with a rainbow 278
Descended to earth,
I wonder if it would be as beautiful as you?
... Sanawdd...............
wwww
.33:
4
You are not moved by violent winds;
You have very lucid eyes of the mind.
So this cloud can not compete with you.
Perhaps it has fled to the mountain tops?
...
25
....
With a face like a full moon, eyes like large lotus leaves,
Hair like smoke swirled into a crown," jaws like a lion,
Limbs as smooth as lotus roots, calves like Sharaba 280 –
Oh, it is as though, for making you alone beautiful, all beauty
has been assembled together on you!”
w
a
l
awun
,
S
.e,.
is..
276 marEsT is a transliteration from Sanskrit. Some suggest this is either the Indian
cuckoo or a type of sparrow, Whatever type of bird it actually may be, there is
agreement that it is a very sweet-sounding singing bird.
277 55 literally "nectar of the eyes', but is an expression meaning
“handsome, elegant', 'graceful' or 'beautiful' person.
278 555 is a metaphor for a rainbow and also means Indra's bow.
279 R oy is a particular way of tying up hair into a knot or crown.
80 g E' is a mythical eight-legged lion.
wal
66



bogor The Six Brothers: Chapter Three yer
With his charming smile and cleansed, leaf-shaped lips, SON OF
DESIRE sincerely said to his love,
"Beautiful maiden, has the moon 28) shifted
To the mirror of your face?
I think the youthful beauties of a goddess 282
Have all been stolen by you.
Has melted snow of a mountain peak
Been applied to your body?
Is the makeup on your cheeks
Made from the red 283 morning clouds 2284
www.XALIL DAWw.wawal24.www.wwwwwwwwwwww-VAIVOM
Between the silver vases of your full breasts and
The precious stand of your hips
Your lotus-like waist is so thin
I still doubt whether it is there or not.
Your pure white rows of teeth
Outshine the stars.
Your ruby-like 285 red lips
Defeats the beauty of red lightning.
WWWWMWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWW
.
.
I think your beauty and that of a goddess 286
Have been weighed on scales and .
Since your beauty is far heavier,
You remain here on earth.
WWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWW
281 295 og' is a metaphor for the ‘moon' literally meaning "source of
happiness crest. AST is a reference to the top knot of the hair of Shiva
(595997') which is said to look like a crescent moon. One of Shiva's many epithets
is གཙུག་ན་ཟླ་བ་ *moon crested'.
282 qalmaya' is the name of a Hindu goddess. @apat 'is also an expression
used to describe beautiful women.
28 ལེ་ཁྲི་ is best read as ལི་ཁྲི་ and in this context refers to the red-yellowish colour and
not the area pigment.
284 dana are the clouds at sunrise and sunset.
285 GT is a transliteration from Sanskrit, being the gemstone ruby.
286 སྡིག་མེད་གནས་ཀྱི་བུ་མོ་



boom The Six Brothers: Chapter Three zor
Passionate white lotuses 287 proclaim:
You are the same as a moonbeam!'
Since the full moon now can not compete with you
It has become broken hearted.
Glorious eyes of deer's are humiliated by the size
and radiance of your eyes.
Arrogant red evening clouds are intimidated by the shine
from the red makeup of your cheeks.
Sandalwood trees, embarrassed by your thin waist and
beautiful limbs,
Have forsaken their pride and fled to the mountains in
the west, is it not so?”
For a long time the two of them enjoyed many kinds of songs, dances
and games. The maid servant and the two other brothers also watched
them. They were amazed by their behaviour and greatly admired
them.
Slowly, the maid servant came close to them
Entreating her, “Madame, go home!
Your husband is in the mansion.
He is missing you, his love."
“Don't you remember that your mother-in-law's behaviour
Is like the dark clouds of the end of the age? 288
Before she hails down harsh words
You had better go home."
Hearing this, she closed up like an evening water lily.
She, the passionate one,
stood a mirror up on the ground, and..
On a flat stone she put a pair of water lilies 289 symbolising
Her amorous intentions in the garden for when the
moon rose.
287 T'ag" is a type of water lily which opens up only at the appearance of the moon.
28 དུས་མཐའི་སྤྲིན་
289 ཀུནྡ་ is synonymous with ཀུ་མུད་
68



S.
be The Six Brothers: Chapter Three moet
Her heart was so set on SON OF DESIRE'S face that
With reluctant steps she went home.
Drawing the bow of her eyebrow with desirous,
arrow-like glances,
She looked back and shot them to the target of her love
again and again.
Though his heart followed after his love, making him,
This unmoving body, like an empty house,
On his memory tablets her beautiful moon-like image
Was etched by his thoughts and slowly he left.
Then SON OF DESIRE, VIOLENCE and DARKNESS amused themselves
together in the garden. When the sun was going down, they said to
each other that they should look for a place to sleep in the garden of
asoka trees.
At that time, the Lord of the Day 290
Was on the precious chariot
Being pulled by the seven green wind horses.291
Indeed, the sun was truly departing from the sky.
Being fed up with the wrongs of the world,
The sun prepared to go to another place. .
But being sad at leaving the lotus gardens,292
The sun looked back again and again.
The sun slowly descended to the western mountain peaks,
Which were dressed in red clothes of evening clouds.293
This scene looked like an emerald vase:
Arranged on a stand decorated with gold.
290 gota ago literally means 'Lord of the Day'and is a metaphor for the sun.
29525959
292 2599 a' is a metaphor for lotus garden. It literally means ‘one hundred leaf
garden'. The sun and lotus flowers are considered to be close friends.
293 gg Water
69



---
-
-----
--
-
boo The Six Brothers: Chapter Three Boer
Then, as if being called
By the meritorious portion of sentient beings in the
west continent, 294
The sun entered the boat of blazing sunlight.
And went to the great western sea.
Seeing this, and realising the time had arrived,
SON OF DESIRE pretended to go somewhere else,
But into the garden of his lover's village..
He actually went.
In the garden were his lover's footprints
Of saffron rubbed onto her feet, and .::
He was there smelling the sweet fragrance
Of the flower used for cleaning teeth.295
Then a canopy of darkness,
Like the sky's shadow, covered over. .
It became as dark as if beautiful women?9 everywhere
Had been smeared with black paint.297 :
Night is the sword of flesh-eating demons
Which chops up the light of day,
Scattering sparks into space which
Become stars that fill the sky. :)
Those who have eyes become like the blind, and
The vision of nocturnal creatures 24 increases.
People sleep on comfortable beds,: ..
Their minds being transported to dreamland.
294 7555a5 the western continent of Utilising Cattle.
295 is the stain that remains on the teeth of Indian girls who purposely eat betel
leaves in order to colour their teeth..
290 759 '6is a metaphor for beautiful women.
297 29TN is a metaphor for the colour black, but also means 'eye medicine!.
298@qara'is literally 'blind of the day', but is a metaphor for ‘nocturnal
animals'.



9
.1
.
:::
Logo The Six Brothers: Chapter Three year
:
"
Slowly, in the city of the sky,
The clear shining light of the rising moon
Looks like a beautiful pure blue woman
Being clothed with white robes.
"!!
""""
Then, like a crystal mansion 299
Surrounded by a net of moonbeams
Of the reflection of all sentient beings' merit,
The Lord of the Night Sciearly appears.
"
""""""""
At that time, the moon's beautiful reflection appeared
as if it was descending to wish-fulfilling lakes to bathe, and
Shone so brightly that the water looked like milk. ...,
The nectar of the moonbeams shone everywhere :
Making the stars and water lily gardens full of happiness.
""""
"
""..........
i
Taking the opportunity while her husband slept
FLOWER TREE, calling to her love
With the musical sound of her ankle bracelets,
She arrived in the garden.
As if they were destroying the darkness of night
And making the moon appear dark,
So the two beautiful ones
Rivalled both the reflection and radiance of the moon."
SON OF DESIRE and FLOWER TREE then met in the garden. On a wide,
flat rock they put out a thin mat and enjoyed some food and drink.
They quietly sang songs to each other, comfortably rested on the mat
and enjoyed all pleasures.
*
Though her desire was satisfied
Her love was not fulfilled.
Though her heart was moved with craving
She was so tired she could not move.
*
**
...:
299 euros eorgias' is a metaphor for the moon.
300 ml başaiya is literally 'Lord of the Night', being a metaphor for the moon.
301 Furas is the moon's reflection.
VM WWW



S
TARHEYRIR
boo The Six Brothers: Chapter Three ser
Having drunk the honey 50% of
Her pimba-like 30% lips,
SON OF DESIRE, like one who was drunk,
Immediately fell into a deep sleep.
Weary from the happy burden, and
Having fallen into a restful sleep,
He was like a watermill
Without the force of water. 304
Slowly, as if it was revealing the evil behaviour
Of the two lovers,
The clear mirror of the sunrise
Shone forth from the east.
At that moment, they heard the awful sound of the footsteps
Of her mother-in-law close by.
Like a flesh-eating demonness 305
So she was the destroyer of their love.
"Where is the deceitful one
Who has discarded her husband 306
And goes into the den of thieves?"
Saying this she shot harsh words like poison arrows
Which struck both lover's hearts
Causing their frightened, coarse body hairs to bristle, and
Their misery became hundreds of times greater
Than the happiness of their long companionship.
The grief caused by the fire of separation was so great
That, like a melting snow mountain,
Rivers of tears rushed downwards
Washing thoroughly the vases of her breasts.
302 @w ars is literally “honey saliva,
Dars is a red fruit found in India.
304 Qggdag is a metaphor for 'water'.
305 Samos
306 59 5 535 is literally 'lord/owner of the mansion'. .
.
.
72



1
The Six Brothers: Chapter Three se
Like a great sea monster catching a turtle,
Her mother-in-law seized the powerless girl,
Bound her limbs and
Beat her as if beating raw cotton,
SON OF DESIRE,
Trembling and panting rapidly,
Was so terrified that he quickly fled,
As if being pushed along by a violent wind.
When SON OF DESIRE ran towards them, the two other brothers
realised that he had come to them in the grip of fear. So they too
became frantic and quickly got up. The three of them then left that
place. As fear overtook them they panicked and completely lost any
rational thought. Since the light just before sunrise was not very
bright, it was difficult for them to find the outline of the path. Without
looking where they were going, they wandered all over the place as
they ran away.
In the direction where they ran there was a raging river. With some
hesitation, they attempted to cross it, but the great force of the water
washed them away. Unable to bear the force of the waves, they were
tossed around everywhere. Repeatedly crashing into the sharp rocks
of the canyon they experienced immeasurable pain and let out great
cries. At that time, their three younger brothers happened to be near
the river at the place of the figls trees. Hearing these screams, they
said to themselves, "What is this?". They knew that the sounds were
the cries of frightened people. Compelled by loving compassion, they
raced to the river. After seeing their three older brothers in such a
state, without the slightest hesitation they entered the water. With
great strength they were able to grab the older brothers and bring them
to shore.
.
.........
.
307 ཆུ་སྲིན་ཆེན་པོ་ is a great mythological sea creature. ཆུ་སྲིན་is a translation of the
Sanskrit 'makara' which was said to be a crocodile-like monster that inhabited vast
oceans. Some suggest that it was a sea monster with eighteen heads. q are also
known by other names such as: poražava TERANENSTV gag
འཛིན་ཁྲི། རལ་གྲིའི་སོ་ཅན། །
308 @ TE is a type of Indian fig tree.
...............
..
...............................
....
.....
.......
.
..
...



von The Six Brothers: Chapter Three yer
Choked with the water that filled their stomachs, the three older
brothers became unconscious. The younger brothers hung them over
bent tree branches, draining the water out of them. They also rubbed
rapeseed oil onto them. After slowly regaining consciousness, the
three older brothers were taken by the younger brothers to the place of
the fig trees. They blissfully stayed there and were extremely happy.
Since their lives had been saved, radiant smiles of great joy appeared
on their faces. Their smiles were like the splendid beauty of the web
of rays of the rising sun which at that particular moment was
emanating from the east. VIRTUOUS then said, “Friends, is not what I
previously said to you in fact true?
You did not trust in truthful words,
Joyfully you participated in sinful deeds.
With the bartering wares of your desire
You have bought the burden of misery.
Wanting to steal another man's wife,
You nearly lost even your own life.
Craving the object of your desire so much,
Look at the unwanted pain that has come upon you.
w
ww
Departing from the steadfastness of modesty and
Running down the wrong path,
You fell down into the canyon of desire and
Were tossed about by violent waves of affliction :
Your bodies, that were carried away by this river, ..
Were saved by us today.
But who is able to save you from the waters of desire,
Which completely carry one away?
A river which descends down a mountainside into a canyon,
rapidly going downhill,
With churning waves that crash into rocky mountain sides,
is not the most difficult to cross.



bigo The Six Brothers: Chapter Three ser
The river which comes from the mountain of sin,
with waves of affliction that surge and flow to the
precipice of the lower realms and
Falls into the ocean of samsara, 50% which contain the water
of the sufferings of birth, ageing, sickness and death -
this is the most difficult to cross!
kecewWwwWw.WANAWAWCAMISALUSS.
Who is able to tell about the qualities of the faultless,
marvellous moral law?
Which is a bridge for crossing over the river of suffering,
a boat for entering the ocean of the dharma,
A field for growing all virtue and goodness,
a sky free from the stain of sin,
Rain for ripening the merit of benefit and bliss, and
a sun 30 which dries up the dampness of desire."..
VIOLENCE then asked, “Oh really? So what are your morals like
then?" In reply VIRTUOUS explained, “Evil people can not even
admire our morals. It is like this,
Ethical behaviour has no motive for harming even
one's enemies, forsakes dissension and hurtful words,
does not take another's life,
Has no desire for pleasures, does not seduce others by lying,
does not steal,
Avoids wrong viewpoints and pointless talk, is not deceptive,
does not take another's wife,
Upholds virtue, abandons negativity and
does not neglect in helping others." .
i
nwumiwa WWW
DARKNESS then said, “Friends, is what you said about “not lying'
itself also a lie? The defining characteristics of morality may be as
you say. However, who will believe that you have these very qualities
you have spoken about?" VIRTUOUS replied, “Oh my, we have spent
this much time together, but still you do not understand our inherent
309 a gain' or 'the ocean of cyclical existence'.
310 525 is literally 'the green-grey house', being a metaphor for the sun.
31 g can also be translated as 'moisture', 'humidity' or 'wet'.
75



boo The Six Brothers: Chapter Three yer
nature? Is what we have just done for you difficult for you to grasp?
If the cataracts of doubt obscure your eyes of discernment, we will
remove your blurred vision by the surgical instrument of true
revelation.” Then in unison the three brothers said to the gods of the
sky,
“Great gods314_Brahma 315 and Vishnu, 316 Shiva and Indra,318
Sunland Moon, 320
You are the witnesses of all good and evil deeds in this world.
If it is true that we always keep the faultless morals that are
pleasing to the Superior Ones,
Then, from the clear sky immediately send down here
a rain of flowers."
Then, by the power of the true proclamation of the three younger
Exalted Ones,321 Brahma and the kings of the gods»22 instantly rained
down from the sky divine precious flowers made from various jewels
Mint
mind
312.07g' is a disease of the eye where the eye deteriorates to the point of 'vitreous
floaters' appearing in the eye blurring one's vision. The term is also used to mean
*blurred vision', though the expression a ga is more commonly used to
communicate blurred or unclear vision.
313 gr' means 'spoon', but can also refer to instruments used by doctors. In this
context it means a surgical instrument for removing cataracts.
314 al
315 5 Da literally 'four faces' and is an epithet of Brahma - who is more
commonly known in Tibetan as NT.
316 215577467" literally “the lotus-eyed one,' being an epithet of Vishnu, who is
more commonly known as ཁྱབ་འཇུག་
$! 955 literally 'origin of happiness', an epithet of Shiva, who is more
commonly known as དབང་ཕྱུག་
318 25 mariage literally the Lord of happiness and so forth', an epithet of Indra,
who is more commonly known as a gas
3195959literally 'seven horses', a metaphor for the sun.
3202 556 literally ‘hare possessing one', a metaphor for the moon based on the
perception that the dark areas of the moon resemble a hare or rabbit.
321 95T is a reference to the three younger brothers.
322 a Tarta
e
76
n



boo The Six Brothers: Chapter Three mer
of the lotus, the blue lotus, the celestial tree323 and the great celestial
tree.
At that moment, the gods, having believed their true words,
Made an offering to them by sending down flowers made
from various jewels.
The radiance of the multi-coloured rays of the flowers
appeared as if they were removing the darkness of the
older brother's doubts.
With smiling leaves and waving anthers,
it was as though the flowers were praising ethical conduct.
The three older brothers were amazed and also fully believed in the
Bodhisattvas' marvellous ethics and the great power of their true
words. With great joy all the brothers then returned to their home
land.
The steadfast foundation of faith and renunciation;
the well stacked precious bricks 324 of the learnings, 325.
surrounded by the courtyard of gentleness and self-control;
The beautiful balcony of wonderful qualities;
the well hung cloth 32 ornaments of mindfulness and
alertness; the archway 327 of diligently helping others,
Walls unmoved by winds of evil deeds, which are impossible
for enemy ignorance to destroy; the roof which perfectly
saves from the painful heat of suffering;
The gate which stops the fall to the lower realms,
and the staircase of the path of liberation -
a mansion of morality like this is oh so wonderful!
323 qera' is also spelled waist or 2757
324 cm bricks which have been fired in a kiln.
325guage is a reference to the three sublime learnings.
326 དྲ་ཕྱེད་ also known as དྲ་བ་དྲ་ཕྱེད་ are embroidered cloth or silk ornaments hung on
walls or over doors.
327 Day' is generally referred to as a dismount platform for alighting from a horse.
However, it also refers to the decorative archway on the top of large gates of temples,
monasteries, palaces and large houses.



.
ve The Six Brothers: Chapter Three ser
In summary, it can be said that in this world ageing is the greatest of
all frailties and desire causes all suffering and fear. I give great praise
to Bodhisattvas who always abide by the ethical disciplines of
controlling evil conduct, 32% gathering virtuous dharma and caring for
others. 34 Thus, it can also be said that the one who keeps these ethics
will certainly achieve truth's power.
This is chapter three.
MYYTIC MOTTYY YYYYYYYWWMMWMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMimi"cicirimicini
::.
.
©
di TT WWW
W WMWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWYM
1.NO
328 སྡོམ་པ་ is the first of the three types of ethical behaviour, The ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས་གསུམ་ are:
1. Gaišiag ava" (which is often abbreviated as arsi') the ethical
behaviour of vows, 2.575 554 the ethical behaviour of gathering virtuous
dharma, 3. སེམས་ཅན་དོན་བྱེད་ཀྱི་ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས་ the ethical behaviour of acting for the
benefit of other sentient beings. (3. is also known as 'S 7735 ")
329 50.Vega
330.797 on Fašiai katerijavay" is synonymous with žaya 3557950aigua".



CHAPTER FOUR
Then the season gradually turned to autumn.
.
Like The Lord of the Earth 3 giving to all creatures
Whatever they wish,
So during the very delightful time of autumn 132
Sentient beings acquire the fullness of their merit.
The earth, which has become golden
By the fullness of ripe harvests,
Appears as though it has been covered with smelted gold
From golden clouds * being melted by radiant heat. ..
The heads of grain bearing the full harvest, 1 . .
Urged on by cool breezes, perform shimmering dances.
Which refresh farmers and
Look like a host inviting the poor to be guests.
Charming trees, with the tips of their fingers,
Scatter everywhere sweet and nutritious fruit
Which, if they are tasted by the tongue, *14.
Are more delicious than the nectar of hundreds of flavours.
Mountains, which are decorated by herbal grasslands
and waterfalls
And are beautifully clothed with saffron-robes,
Appear as if they have renounced the frivolity of
summer's cravings
And are competing with the ascetic practices 335 of sages.
331 ནོར་འཛིན་བདག་པོ་ could also be a reference to བསྟན་མ་ ཨ the goddess of the earth
who testified about the deeds of Buddha.
332 «gis best read as ž agar
333 bivao refers to both morning and evening clouds which are often golden, red
or orange in colour.
334 595 literally 'Lord of the tongue', being a metaphor for 'tongue'.
335 Q arcar is also translated as "yogic disciplines'.
79



be The Six Brothers: Chapter Four soul
MmiciriiuinimmmmmmmmmmmiiYYTYMCMİYYYYYYYYYYYYYYYriccininia
At that time, the brothers needed to do a few things so they set out in a
westerly direction. They came to a precipitous mountain path where
there were some terrifying and very ugly people with leprosy. 13° They
were foul-smelling. Being tormented with agonising pain, their
bodies had become so weak that they had fallen down in the very
direction the brothers were going, blocking their path. DARKNESS
paid no attention to them and simply stepped over them and went on
his way. Upon seeing them, SON OF DESIRE covered his nose and
exclaimed to his brothers,
"Oh, my poor eyes!
How can they see such a thing?
Oh my! Who are these people
With bodies rivalling those of hungry ghosts?
Sores fill their bodies, their mouths and eyes are torn,
Puss and blood drip down.
They look like the remains of a body
After insects have eaten it.
The rotten, festering, foul smell,.
Which has spread everywhere,
Is calling out to flies and
Driving away the pure.”
After saying this, SON OF DESIRE turned away.
UNDERSTANDING said,
GREAT
M
“Terrifying things that are called diseases'
Are the fangs of the Lord of Death,
Ferociously striking
All beings over and over.
vie
3:36 We also refers to skin diseases in general. It is quite likely that during the
time this story was written the disease of leprosy was unknown.
MAUAMI
80



von The Six Brothers: Chapter Four ser
Even though you may have a beautiful body and look proudly
at your youthful beauty and love yourself,
always serving yourself with food and clothes,
At the time of being struck by terrifying sickness,
you will not be able to walk around and eat food,
your eyes will shut, your arms will go stiff
and like a rotten tree you will fall to the ground.
You will have no strength, your flesh will shrivel,
your tongue will dry up and even though you are not able
you will moan and wail, you will roll around and your foul
breath will choke your throat.
Violent pain, in a mere instant, will also cause hellish
suffering-all this is called 'sickness',
which is like the wind at the end of the age
that is impossible for anyone to overcome,
Therefore, completely abandon the fetters of desire of the
fleeting body – which is the source of intolerable pain,
is difficult to serve, is ungrateful and torments 33? the mind.
Use your pointless, hollow tree-like life and straw-like
wealth for the benefit of yourself and others,
and then you will achieve permanent happiness. "339
When the lepers heard these words, they thought that the brothers
were belittling them and with sad hearts whispered to themselves,
"Oh my! The clear lustre of youthful beauty
Makes them proud lowly foxes.
Parasites that overtake bodies
Make even lions 340 weak.”
337 075595' is also a metaphor for 'sun' and 'drought', though in this context refers
to pain and torment.
338 5 literally 'water tree', and is typically translated as plantain: tree though
this may not necessarily be correct. 585 seems to also be a reference to annual trees
that do not bear fruit or if they do, only do so for one season and then die. 'Bamboo'
and "banana tree' have been other suggestions.
339 592ana also means liberation from samsara,
340 25059 is literally enemy of herbivores”, being a metaphor for lion.
81



Woo The Six Brothers: Chapter Four Let
Upon hearing this, VIOLENCE became angry, raised up a stick and
going to beat them with it said, “Hey! You wait a minute! Your bodies
themselves refute what you say. You are the object of abuse by even
dogs, ravens and the like. People also can not bear to look at you.
How is it that you ridicule us, we who have become the king's
ministers? This is totally unacceptable."...
Restraining VIOLENCE with his arms, LOVING KINDNESS, his eyes
full of tears said,
“Stop! Stop! Rather than bullying them
You must overcome yourself.
Harming the frail
Destroys your honour.
Seeing destitute ones and
Not loving them in the slightest
But intimidating them with hurtful words -
Oh my! This sinful mind is repulsive.
Poisonous food, thorn trees
and angry people deserve to be despised.
Faces covered with ugly defects are in fact beautiful,
but angry faces are not.
Those who have lost everything are really not poor,
but those who do not have the riches of forbearance
are indeed very poor.
The might of an enemy can not destroy your reputation,
but your anger can overcome you in an instant.
As touching a blade of a sword cuts your hand,
so anger destroys you.
As battle weapons can not penetrate thick armour,
so forbearance protects you.
In the three realms there is no hero who overcomes beings
in the way that anger does.
It is also difficult to find a saviour like forbearance,
so always practice it."



1
:
..
..
.
.
..
..
.
voor The Six Brothers: Chapter Four per
.
.
...
After LOVING KINDNESS said this, VIOLENCE brought his anger under
control.341 Then GREAT UNDERSTANDING and the two other younger
brothers, stretched out their smooth and beautiful lotus root-like hands
and stroked the poor ones on their heads. Compelled by the need and
in order to heal the leprosy, without any apprehension, they sucked
out the sores that were covered with scabs. Their mouths became full
of the yoghurt-like lymphatic fluid which they then spat out. They
applied excellent medicine to their wounds and the pain of their
sickness subsided. The inferior minds of the older brothers could not
comprehend such extraordinary behaviour 34 and so after observing
what they did, they were displeased and VIOLENCE angrily said to
them, "Hey,
We have never harmed you at all
So why are you killing our appetites? 14.5
Seeing such evil behaviour gags our throats.
So who is now able to eat even delicious food?
The lepers are like freshly ripened sin and
All impure things accumulated together.
They are revolting to all people and ...
Their defilement 144 has spread everywhere.
...
From these filthy leather bags 345
You were satiated by drinking blood and puss.
As your physical well-being 346has now greatly improved
So perhaps 34? you will obtain great status!"
341 VOSKY 1955* literally the then sent away/released his anger”.
34? བདག་ཉིད་ཆེན་པོའི་སྤྱོད་པ་
343 R in this context refers to one's appetite for food and not "life' or
"livelihood. Roman can also refer to nourishing or sustaining food.
344 k V in this context is a reference to a defilement, 'filth' or 'stain".
345 Farst "leather bags or pouches'. In this context farct is a reference to the bodies
of the sick ones.
346 55g
347 75 is a somewhat archaic word which is used to indicate a degree of uncertainty
or doubt.
.
.
.
V
WWWYAHYADA
CIBERS:



boo The Six Brothers: Chapter Four zer
Laughingly, VIRTUOUS replied to VIOLENCE and the two older
brothers,
"Seeing this behaviour you became sick and
If you are now not able to eat food,
Then how have you lived your life always existing
With your body which is full of blood and excrement?
Shamelessness, seduction of others,
Sin, deceit and wicked behaviour -
All these, which the holy ones revile,
Why do you, the pure ones, not forsake them?
Countless unwanted discomforts
Continually torment all beings.
If we have the ability to help others yet do not,
How then can we escape the disease of affliction?”
The three older brothers were left speechless..
At that moment, being overcome with joy and washed with smiles, the
lepers' faces sparkled. And so they gazed at the holy ones, clasped
their hands in a praying position and praised them saying,
“You are a wish-fulfilling tree to beggars, doctors to the sick,
a mother and father to the poor.
You are a rest to exhausted guests, a guide to those on
a long journey, a great comfort to the terrified.
You are the pilot 348 of liberation from samsara,
the hero for overcoming sin, the shining light for all beings.
As long as it is possible in our lives to walk, lie down.......
and move about, we will always remember you by paying
homage to you.'
348 2551 'pilot' or 'captain', also being an epithet of Buddha.
84



Vo The Six Brothers: Chapter Four ye
The lepers touched the brothers' feet with their heads saying, “May
you have great fortune and at all times be victorious!” The brothers
then happily left that place.
muunnin
sirrin
As they were slowly travelling along, the day was coming to an end.
They said to each other, “Now the sun is taking a small rest on the
mountain in the west and wants to enter the great east ocean to cool
his inflamed, passionate desire for the evening cloud girl wearing
purple makeup. "S" It is as though the nocturnal ones, who were
suspicious that the flowers of the lake would follow after the sun
whom they loved, have bound the flowers with a net 35 of darkness.
We too can not continue to progress further, so we should look for a
place around here to stay.” They then found a brilliantly coloured
mountain rock ledge, that looked like stacked up pieces of a
rainbow 354 which had been chopped up by the wind. And there they
stayed for the night.
e
s
ASKATAS
Then slowly, the moon, which had ascended to the middle of the sky,
shone forth white, radiant light. The light looked like stretched out
fingers giving relief to those who had fallen into the midst of
darkness. The brothers slept deeply, their blissful sleep being like a
taste of divine meditation.355
ARAS
When it was dawn, GREAT UNDERSTANDING got up and called to his
friends, “Now that the night has come to an end, get up! This place is
fraught with danger and there are also many bandits here. Now, as
long as it is not yet daybreak, we should get beyond this isolated
place. So quickly get up and follow us.” The three younger brothers
then left that place. Continuing to lie down, the three older brothers
349 Faragga 5 976' literally 'the conquering one of thousands of rays',
being one of the many epithets of the sun.
350 yay is a purple-reddish dye made from the root of a plant.
35' མཚན་མོ་རྒྱུ་བ་དག་
352 F means "trap' or 'net'.
353 JAIN is a rock cleft or shelter often inhabited by birds.
354 525tame literally "Indra's bow' and is a metaphor for rainbow.
395 eta 250 literally 'concentration of the gods”.
356 Nage



Boom The Six Brothers: Chapter Four ye
raised their heads a little and DARKNESS said, "It is not time to go
yet." And he and the others fell back to sleep.
TWITTYTTYCUTYUUTTUUTTY CUTTIMOIY Giardi
Those drunk on sleep have no sense of what they should
or should not do;
they also have no regard for their own lives.
They do not notice even when being hit,
nor do they wake up even when being shaken; ...
they also do not even hear the sound of great thunder. ***
Even though their bodies do not move;
and their minds have no discernment,
they make many hideous snoring noises.
They can not even be compared to lunatics,
mindless pigs or any other animals.
During the night, in the sky's garden
Many stars, who are the moon's lovers,
Completely surrounded the moon, and
For a long time they wandered around together.
The moon, whose eyes were closed with loving smiles and
Who was drunk with nectar,
Slipped down the smooth surface of the sky 359
Falling into the sea.
i
Seeing this, the sky 360 cried down 361
Tears of dew nectar, and
Its necklace of stars was slowly stolen
By the great light of dawn.
wwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwww
wwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwww
357 ago 9 9 literally the sound of thousands of thunder ...,
358 gavagant literally the face everyone loves”, being one of the many ::
epithets of the moon.
359 vagar in this context refers to the sky and does not literally mean 'sapphire'.
360 Saeva is an epithet of the sky, a poetic name for women, a poetic epithet of
evening*, an epithet of the goddess Paldan Lhamo (gareggiat) and a poetic
reference to goddesses in general.
361 VSTART is a reference to dew falling directly down from the sky.
86



14The Six Brothers: Chapter Four ye
The night, knowing her lover.362 had abandoned her,,
And that she had lost her jewellery,
Slowly disappeared
As if overcome with intense sorrow,
At this time, the three older brothers woke up, got dressed and
prepared to leave. Suddenly, like real flesh-eating demons, some very
violent bandits arrived. Their evil faces were yellowish in colour,
they were brandishing clubs, swords and battle axes. * and had nooses
tied around their waists. Like elephants entering a mud pool, they
stormed towards the brothers.
Seeing this, they were overcome with fear, their limbs shook,
their mouths dried up, they looked around frantically
and lost their minds.
At that time, had their strength and ferocity fled? Had their
terrifying and violent anger been extinguished?
If they could not even walk properly,
how could they fight against their enemies?
The cowardly, lacking in valour yet abundant in anger,
are very brave only when it comes to subduing the weak.
The bandits seized the three brothers' clothes, jewellery and all their
other possessions. They tied them up as tightly as the dreadlocks 364 of
a Brahman, las causing them to cry out with much wailing.
At that time, since the three younger brothers had left earlier, they
kept looking back again and again but they did not see their older
brothers coming. Wondering what had happened to them, the
younger brothers went back for them. When the younger brothers
realised what had occurred, they ran quickly towards them. The
bandits, seeing that the three younger brothers were running without
the slightest hesitation and possessed no armour or weapons, became
very annoyed. So with all their strength they ran and bound up the
362 Qgon in this context is a reference to the moon, who is the night's lover.
363 50is also spelled on
364 raukt
365 བྲམ་ཟེའི་རལ་པ་



boo The Six Brothers: Chapter Four for
younger brothers with a noose and attempted to turn them upside
down. However, like trying to pull a great rocky mountain with a
rope, the bandits could not move them at all. The brothers then flexed
their muscles just a little and broke the nooses into pieces. Even
though the brothers possessed great strength, they did the bandits no
harm in return. Seeing that the younger brothers were very peaceful,
the bandits were greatly moved and they were both frightened and
amazed at this.
At that time, they were not overpowered by the might of
the enemy, but their great bravery overpowered even the
bandits.
Their limbs could not be bound by the thick noose,
though their hearts were bound tightly by the noose.
of compassion.
The bandits could not steal their possessions,
but the brothers stole away all their pride.
Those who wanted to destroy others by anger and ferocity
were overcome by peaceful and gentle behaviour.
Like a fire fly wanting to dry up the sea,
or a grass noose binding a blazing bonfire, or
The wing span of a bee out-measuring the sky,
or a lead sword cutting off a rocky mountain top, or
The light breeze of Ngayab 366 wanting to blow
over the wish-fulfilling tree, 367
or the eyes looking at the circumference 368 of Mount Meru,
So are the inferior ones, who,
wanting to overcome these exalted beings,
were as stupid as cattle and those who destroy themselves.
Kneeling at the feet of the three younger brothers, the bandits
entreated them, “You who are gods, please understand. We were
366 FUT is one of the eight smaller continents in Buddhist cosmology. It is known
for its light, cool breezes and is a great distance from the wish-fulfilling tree of the
divine realm. (A Fuq' is also a yak's tail used for fanning or dusting.)
367 MCN 25' or 'divine tree'.
sada also means 'area,' 'size' or 'extent'.
508 W
ant to
88



.
".1!!!
bo The Six Brothers: Chapter Four ye
www.
R
terribly confused and we have made many mistakes, so kindly show
tolerance towards us. Being poor and having no food we steal things,
seeking our livelihood in this way. If you save those we have bound,
then please do not destroy us.” In reply the brothers said, "Friends,
think clearly! We are not gods. Even though we possess great
strength, we will not harm you. We will give you whatever you
desire, all our possessions and even our own lives. But please release
those small-minded ones who can not bear any pain. If you do so, you
will attain great wealth and merit." Amazed at this, the bandits
exclaimed, “Oh my!
In which world is there such great strength and wonderful
behaviour that surpasses that of people and gods?
Normal people, for protecting their life and limb,
will even seduce their own kin
and resolutely hold deadly grudges against enemies.
Disregarding wealth and one's own life, not holding grudges
towards enemies but repaying harm with help -
Behaviour like this is completely opposite to worldly conduct,
we don't know whose practice this is.”
GREAT UNDERSTANDING replied,
owDMASKARA SISI HASSAN
"This is not the conduct of worldly people,
nor is it taught by Shiva 36'and Brahma.
Lord Buddha 37°revealed the perfect path
of complete renunciation.
We are born of his lineage,
which follows the path of liberation from this world.
Conduct that is difficult for inferior minds
to comprehend is known as forbearance!"
Seeing their great power and hearing these wonderful words, even the
bandits' hardened, sinful minds, which had been habituated for a very
long time, were pacified. Receiving the amazing blessing of faith for
369 g is a reference to a ge the great Hindu god Shiva.
370 ཐུབ་དབང་, an abbreviation of ཐུབ་པའི་དབང་པོ་ , is an epithet of Buddha and is
literally "The Lord of the Sages'.
89



14. The Six Brothers: Chapter Four ze
the first time, they untied the captives and let them go. With eyes full
of tears, the bandits prostrated and praised Buddha saying,
“You who are a surgical instrument ? to those blind
with anger, a hand for rescuing those fallen down a cliff,
a lamp for wandering in the darkness,
Precious hidden jewels, a great friend who gives help,
the source of wish-fulfilling treasure, :: ::::
The enemy of ignorance, the opposite of worldly conduct,
the knife itself for cutting the bonds of attachment,
A lion which can not be overcome, the great powerful
Indra, 372the Peaceful Buddha 37-may you always
be victorious!
Oh Great Exalted Ones, please completely save us sinners! From
now, even if we die we will never sin or steal again."
Then, the web of the first light of dawn,
Which was illuminating
This miraculous situation,
Beautifully rose from the east.
74
Closed lotuses 374 which are embarrassed
By the mocking of the proud evening flowers, 37
Are sent reassuring letters
Written by golden pens of the sun's ray.
376
Then, dwelling in his blazing fire-crystal jewelled palace,
Which is completely surrounded by
371 5* *spoon but also refers to instruments used by doctors. In this context 87
means a surgical instrument for removing cataracts.
37? ལྷ་དབང་ is an epithet of Indra, more commonly known as ལྷའི་བརྒྱ་བྱིན་ or
ལྷའི་དབང་པོ་བརྒྱ་བྱིན་
373 9aggat is an epithet of the Buddha.
29' ' is literally 'mud born and is a metaphor for the lotus plant.
37 ཀུནྡ་ a white flower that blooms at night. ཀུན་ད་ is synonymous with ཀུ་མུད་ and
ཀུ་མུ་ད་
378 མེ་ཤེལ་ནོར་བུ་ཡི་ཁང་པ་བརྩེགས་པ་རབ་འབར་
90



bo The Six Brothers: Chapter Four ser
His retinue of thousands of rays of light,
The Lord of the Day 3arose.
For bringing happiness to the lotus lake and
Great enjoyment to people,
The sun, who controls the whole world and
Is the only eye for sentient beings, fully radiated.
Since the sun is a great, powerful magician
With blazing rays that burn and
Sharp radiating weapons of light,
His Great Majesty 378 is the enemy of the night.
Seeing this, both nocturnal ones and
Forces of darkness flee.
Lesser lights ?"and
The pride of night flowers to are both overcome.
.
Then sin and darkness were pacified, nocturnal beings..
and thieves were shamed,
Lotuses, bound by frosts, and those tied with nooses
were together released.
The sun of one thousand glorious rays
and the might of completed merit is so wonderful,
That people and honey bees 38 buzz 38with amazement.
Knowing that the bandits had abandoned their sinful behaviour and
were satisfied with the miraculous nectar, 38 the younger brothers
377 ཉིན་མོའི་དབང་ཕྱུག་ is a metaphor for the sun.
3783 2555*literally heap of glory', being an epithet of the sun.
8595is also a metaphor for ‘sun', 'eyes', 'light' and 'fire'.
a white flower that blooms at night. 195' is synonymous with ag and
05
38 g š5 literally honey behaviour', being a metaphor for bee.
382 55558 is a metaphor for 'bee' and in this context refers to the sound of the
buzzing of bees.
383 ངོ་མཚར་བའི་བདང་ཡང་རྩིས་ is a reference to the behaviour of the three younger brothers.



vro The Six Brothers: Chapter Four ser
were overjoyed. Then the three brothers, together with their older
brothers, made their way home, travelling through places where their
fame had spread.
Terraces 384 of great merit and immeasurable asceticism,
supporting the divine realm of goodness and virtue,
Dwelling in the middle of the ocean of merit,
surrounded by the seven still, clear lakes and
the seven mountains of ascetic practice,
Unmoved by harmful elephants, free from the mud of anger.
or ravines of sin, and elevated in the fame of the sky -
Who can praise enough the wonder of Mount Meru-like
forbearance?
In summary, it has been revealed that sentient beings are the origin of
various diseases and that anger is a sin. Harm and suffering do not
dishearten or disturb the minds of Exalted Ones - who also help their
enemies. The wonderful characteristics of forbearance are thus
contained here.
This is chapter four.
ten
.
384 05 Far terrace' or 'staircase'. In this context a5 Roy is a reference to the four
terraces of Mt. Meru - Itabaiana In ascending order these are:
1.གནོད་སྦྱིན་ལག་ན་གཞོང་ཐོགས་ Demons/yaska» holding basins, 2.གནོད་སྦྱིན་ལག་ན་ཕྲེང་
ཐོགས་ Demons/yaska' holding garlands, 3. རྟག་མྱོས་ Drunkards, 4. རྒྱལ་ཆེན་རིགས་བཞི་
Four Great Kings.



CHAPTER FIVE
The season then turned to winter.
At that time, the very cold fan of the winter months
Was magically made by the Creator.
Snow, always being great friends with winter,
Had piled up everywhere.
Stars, with frozen and shrivelled wings,
Which having descended to earth and being ground up
By the razor-like atmosphere and made into powder,
Appeared as beautiful as white flowers *** scattered
everywhere.
Mountains lost their green clothes and became naked.
Lady Winter, a considering this to be unattractive,
Covered her lovers with clothes of white silk,
In order to make them sparkle.
"
'.'
."
"
"
"
"
"
Those who can not bear the cold and wish to get warm
Gather together wherever there is sunlight...
The sun can not produce warmth and, ashamed,
It quickly flees.
"
""""
""
"""
"
"""
"".
.
....
Seeing this, streams are disheartened, their hopes dashed
Their flow is completely cut, and so
They flee underground
Pretending to be rocky mountains.
....
.
....
.....
...
.
385 shalat
386 This verse is written in a riddle (9941') style and is a reference to the falling
snow of winter.
387 510519'N literally 'lover season/time', but in this context is clearly referring
to the season of winter.
388 95a literally means “cold touch/sensation'. (While g is is an abbreviation
of 95 garag' it is not a reference to the jackdaw bird as the jackdaw is known as
བྱ་སྐྱུང་ཀ་)
ANA
Y
*
**
.
375



boom The Sir Brothers: Chapter Five me
At this time, the brothers wanted to again journey to another place.
After going north for several days, they arrived at a terrifying charnel
ground 38% on the side of a mountain. The smoke of burning corpses
covered the burial site. Present there were crying relatives, vultures,
dogs and jackals 390 all making various kinds of hideous noises.
Rotten and decomposed corpses and piles of skeletons filled the entire
area. This scene was truly terrifying to behold. The three older
brothers were petrified and extremely frightened. SON OF DESIRE said
to his brothers, "Oh my,
Today has the Lord of the Dead led me here,
or some hungry ghosts deceived me; ; .
or am I myself crazy and just wandered here?
Is this a place of rotten hungry ghosts, 39!
or is it a cannibal demon city, or the place called 'hell'?
Since we are free, we should quickly flee from here
and go to our own homes.
In the future, even in a dream may I never see such evil
as this!”
GREAT UNDERSTANDING explained,
:
"To all beings 'death
Is a weapon of inevitable destruction. ::: :
It is the terrifying mouth of the Lord of Death.
Who is not destroyed by it?
From the first moment of birth
The only direction is towards death,
Along the road of ageing and sickness
Leading directly to the abode of the Lord of Death.
Whoever has power to overcome, or
Riches and methods to seduce, or ,
57*15see footnote 246.
399 fysis synonymous with us
garai are a type of rotten, putrid preta (hungry ghosts) that inhabit filthy places.



v
The Six Brothers: Chapter Five yer
Is a skilful deceiver,
Can not delay death even for a moment.
When surrounded by crying relatives
Gasping for breath over and over, and
When the body is being quickly forsaken,
There is no control over this at all.
Even if you flee to the bowels of a very high mountain, or
climb the wish-fulfilling tree, or
Hide in the immeasurable depths of the ocean, or.
conceal yourself in a remote, lonely place, or
Hide in an enclosure made of indestructible vajra, 393
you can not escape death.
Even Brahma and the great gods can not save themselves
from death.
Tell me something that has been produced that does not
perish!
The course of time causes the ocean to become mere drops
and reduces Mount Meru to dust, and
Reduces the wish-fulfilling tree to ashes
and transforms all worlds to become empty space.
All that is born must die, all that is united must separate,
all that is accumulated will run out, thus nothing is
permanent."
Attempting to make his older brothers disillusioned with worldly
existence, 544 VIRTUOUS took them to the charnel ground and made
them look at each one of the many terrifying corpses and their ugly
dispositions. He then explained,
"Oh my, look at the terrifying end of all people!
Our pointless and ungrateful bodies
392 ažar literally 'the barrel/bucket of a mountain', but is a reference to the
bowels or depths of a mountain.
393
394 Sangat
95



by The Six Brothers: Chapter Five gover
Will one day definitely deceive us.
It is tireless, futile work to look after them.
Previously, they who wore jewelled crowns
and were perfectly perfumed with a musk's scent, and who
With even a little movement their gold earrings
made a ringing sound to each other,
Now are covered in blood, ashes and dust, their hair
has become grey and
They remain here rolling back and forth between the paws
of dogs.
Previously, they who wore clothes of the gods and were
wrapped in smooth, white cotton, ..
Whose skin was lit up by the bright shining light
of pearl necklaces -
Today are covered with some black, rough, rotten
corpse cloths and
They dwell amongst the rocks with their wrists..
bound by grass ropes.
Cenacola La SARMA
395
Previously, those who were washed with water
and anointed with fresh butter,
being unharmed by extreme temperatures,
Who rested comfortably on lion thrones,"
being satisfied by the touch of women,
Now their brains and puss leak out,
and naked they have fallen to the ground.
The sharp fangs of frightening jackals violently rip flesh
and bone, scattering them everywhere.
Previously, those overflowing with the pride of youth,
who showed off wherever they went,
395 5 ' is a throne supported by eight carved lions. This type of throne
represents the fearlessness of a Victorious One.



Home The Six Brothers: Chapter Five for
!
Whose youthful, beautiful breasts were a burden to
their waists,
Now have no flesh at all, their sinews and nerves have left
the body and their cartilage has dried up.
Skeletons like this really do terrify people."
LOVING KINDNESS said,
.
.
.
.
.
"Where has the deluded mind gone
Which has lost its body that it always clung to?
A body which it cherished for a long time,
Looking after it with food and clothes.
.
.
.
.
..""
"
"
""
"
Oh my, the dead ones, who mistakenly loved those
called 'kin',
Who could not bear their family enduring even a little pain,
Have been discarded by their shameless relatives
Here in this lonely place.
"
""""""""""""""".....
""
"
""
""
"
.
.
..
"
The eyes of those who made
Amorous glances to the attractive and
Eyes of hatred to the unattractive,
Are now dug out by crows and taken to the sky.
""""""""""""""
""
.
.
Smooth pimba-like lips, 59?which
Have the fragrance of betel leaves, 598
Today are being kissed by dogs,
And not by their beautiful lovers' lips.
...
.
.
The tongue, which told many lies, and
Uttered harsh and deceiving words,
.........
.
...WWW
396 95 is generally considered to be a small crow or raven though some suggest
there is no difference between them.
39? ངེམ་པ་ is a transliteration from Sanskrit. བེམ་པ་ is a red lip-shaped fruit found in
India.
398 is the stain that remains on the teeth of Indian girls who purposely eat betel
leaves in order to colour their teeth.
WWWWWWW
W WWWWWWWWWWW



"
.
.."..."'."""
"""""""
"
bo The Six Brothers: Chapter Five your
Angered the owl,399 whose beak
Digs it out from deep in the throat.
The hawks and vultures said,
'In order to look after the body
Much sin and harm is committed'.
So they rip up the body, eating even the heart.
Bodies are burnt by a blazing fire, : :
With billowing smoke and the sound of burning flesh.40
So too, the mind is burnt in hell
By the great fire of sin.
Though suffering and various lines of karma
Are clearly manifest on the body,
You still do not understand -
Oh my, you are caught in deception."
Having become very distressed, the three older brothers went to the
three younger brothers and told them, “Previously, we were bound by
ignorance and pride. We did not listen or respect your true words, you
who always help us. Please forgive us for this. From now on, we will
follow you, the learned ones, staying with you like disciples. You
must kindly show us the path that can free us from samsara - which is
impermanent and miserable like this."
GREAT UNDERSTANDING gave his approval to them saying, "Well
done! Excellent! From the beginning, even though we wanted to help
you and had the best intentions for you, you did not become
receptacles of the nectar of wisdom because you were full of your own
importance and saturated by the poison of pride. But now, you have
truly seen the wrongs of worldly existence and you want to follow the
path of virtue. This is wonderful! Therefore, we will gradually show
399 ATC'' is the name of the owl based on the sound that an owl makes. It is
commonly abbreviated as a The ‘hung' sound is so given because the sound of
an owl is considered to be like the sound of a spell or mantra.
400 gram
98



19. The Six Brothers. Chapter Five per
you more wisdom, so come here." GREAT UNDERSTANDING then
continued in poetic verse, "
"Friends, well done! Today, your desire to enter the
right path is excellent.
Samsara is inherent with karma and affliction,
the suffering of birth, ageing, sickness and death, but
The bliss of perfect peace and nirvana is above all else.
Generosity, morality, forbearance, perseverance,
concentration and wisdom are the path of certain
liberation. 401
These perfections come from the riches of much study 402..
and the vast treasures of merit.
They are also obtained from relying on virtuous spiritual
guides and meritorious worship of the Three Jewels.
So in order to attain them, you must quickly go to :
the all-knowing, master spiritual guide
In the great temple of MANIFEST JOY" 403.. . .
"
""
"
""
""""
"""
""
"
"""
"
"
"
They then left the charnel ground and went towards the great temple
called MANIFEST JOY, which was located five yojana 104 away. In this
temple lived the great exalted oneos called the ALL-KNOWING
SPIRITUAL GUIDE.
WWW
www.TAWY O'
WW
w
401 ENT'QSIago or 'the path of renunciation which leads to deliverance'.
402 455&T
40 མངོན་པར་དགའ་བའི་གཙུག་ལག་ཁང་ཆེན་
404551475 g a ganyan is a translation of 'yojana’, an ancient unit of measure
used in India. It is approximately six or seven kilometres though estimations as to the
exact distance of a དཔག་ཚད་ vary. One དཔག་ཚད་ is compromised of eight རྒྱང་གྲགས་
A རྒྱང་གྲགས་ is comprised of 500 འདོམ་ཁང་ . One འདོམ་ཁང་ is the distance of the
span of one's out stretched arms, approximately one and a half metres. Agar is
also known as a mea " - literally one bow length. So the temple was located
approximately thirty kilometres away. According to the teachings of “Time Cycles'
(5
v a r - a famous treatise by Buddha Shakyamuni) the distance of a, ."
game is calculated differently.
8 བདག་ཉིད་ཆེན་པོ་ is an epithet of Bodhisattvas and Buddhas.
wwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwww
99
W



way The Six Brothers: Chapter Five zor
As they were going along the three younger brothers went to help
some people in another place and were presently taking a rest. The
older brothers proceeded on ahead and near to the path they saw a
temple of worship for Shiva, full of many tirthika.406 DARKNESS
thought to himself, “How amazing! Here is the great temple called
MANIFEST JOY.” So he went inside and prostrated before the images
of Shiva, which had the mark of a male, coated in gold, standing erect.
He also made offerings to the tirthika there.
When the three younger brothers learned about what had happened,
they quickly raced after him. Entering the temple, DARKNESS greeted
them, “Friends, did you not prostrate before the images of the Three
Jewels?" GREAT UNDERSTANDING replied, "This is not the Three
Jewels, but rather it is Shiva, the great god of the world, which is not
the object of our homage or offerings. So let's get out of here.” The
tirthika were extremely upset at this and wanting to dispute them said,
“You who are stupid and say senseless and offensive babble, do you
even denigrate the great god of the world?" Then GREAT
UNDERSTANDING said, “Yes, I really am doing so." He then touched
the image of Shiva with his hand and said to it,
“Do you not know the Great Buddha 407-
the Great Master of the Three Realms, 408the King of the
Dharma? 409
You who are not liberated from samsara and remain
afflicted, are you not a servant of Buddha?
406 view is a translation of the Sanskrit word 'tirthika' and is a problematic term to
accurately translate into English. Various attempts such as 'heretic', 'extremist,
'outsider' all fail to adequately transfer the meaning. The expression 'non-Buddhist
is not a fully satisfactory translation as it fails to denote that a sqa' is one who,
though not Buddhist, is a spiritual person seeking an alternative path to
enlightenment.
40 ཐུབ་དབང་མཆོག་
408 སྲིད་གསུམ་བླ་མ་
40 ཆོས་ཀྱི་རྒྱལ་པོ་
100



1
The Six Brothers: Chapter Five gover
We, as courageous lions and sons of the Victorious, 410
are coming here and
You ignorant, proud fox, why do you not pay homage to us?”
Immediately, the statue of Shiva fell to the ground, bowing down at
the feet of the younger brothers.
The sword of the true words of the mighty ones
of compassion
Cut the proud roots of the tree of ignorance, where birds
with wings of pride and wrong doctrines had nested.
Thus Shiva's tree and the unpleasant, brazen arrogance
of the tirthika,
Together with Shiva's crown, fell down and
adorned the feet of the brothers.
In this way, the tirthika and their gods were defeated. The brothers
then left together and went to the great temple of MANIFEST JOY.
Then, in the middle of a vast city,
Completely surrounded by gardens,
With immoveable jewelled walls, and
Splendid, bright coral pillars, 412
They saw the ever joyful
Great mansion of MANIFEST JOY
With light from golden webs of decorations
Shining everywhere.
The sapphire-like 413 light from the roof's dome
Stole the blue clothes of the sky, and
410 5vnavarat
411 avarat is literally the soles of their feet and their toes.
412 55
413 kabar is a transliteration of the Sanskrit word 'Indranlla", being the gem
sapphire
101



""
""
"!!".
!
!
I!
.
..
boo The Six Brothers: Chapter Five per
:
TurTWYTYYTYT
The jewel at the tip of the dome was so ablaze
That it made the sun *-*appear dark.
At the entrance to the great temple were images of Brahma - the
Creator of the world, Indra - the king of the gods, and the Four
Guardians of the World."DARKNESS prostrated before these and said
to his brothers,
“Brahma 4l6and Vishnu "I7are surrounded by
The four guardians of the world.
If you do not pay homage or make offerings to them
To whom then would you look for another refuge?" .
VIRTUOUS then said,
"These great gods, who are full of the pride of their merit
and are not liberated from samsara are not worthy of
worship.
. ..
Bodhisattvas and the Buddha 418- who is the god above all4l9
and is the VICTORIOUS ONE, 420are worthy of worship.
Y YTYWNYUMMMMMMWWYWWMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMWWWWWWWWWWWYMI'YIMMWWMWWWWWWWWWWWWYWWMMMMMMMMMMMMMHH
4:45-959literally ‘seven horses', being a poetic metaphor for the sun.
415 འཇིག་རྟེན་སྐྱོང་བ་བཞི་ also known as the ཕྱོགས་སྐྱོང་བཞི་ - the guardians of the four
directions or viagra the four great kings who rule over various kinds of
spirits in the desire realm. The ‘kings' or ‘guardians' live separately on one of the four
faces of Mt. Meru. The guardians are: 1. W a ys the protector of the area (east),
2. འཕགས་སྐྱེས་པོ་ the one of noble birth (south), 3. སྤྱན་མི་བཟང་ the one with ,
unpleasant eyes (west), 4. རྣམ་ཐོས་སྲས་ the son of all hearing (north), (རྣམ་ཐོས་སྲས་ is
also known as the god or guardian of wealth).
416 g W aas is an epithet of Brahma, literally meaning 'the ancestor of the
three realms'.
417 འཕྲོག་བྱེད་ is an epithet of vishu, more commonly known as ཁྱབ་འཇུག་
418 garsa'wandt' refers to the Buddha as the Lord of the Sages, and to
Bodhisattvas as the sons of Buddha.
419 pure mom is an epithet of the Buddha.
420 སྲིད་ལས་རྣམ་རྒྱལ་ is an epithet of the Buddha.
102
X



1
The Six Brothers: Chapter Five 20
All these worldly gods are just the guardians
of the GREAT MASTER.42)
Let's go inside the temple and see the true object of
our worship - the GUIDE OF THE WORLD." 422
They then went inside the temple and saw the blazing glory of the
mountain-like golden image of the BLESSED ONE,423 with the major
and minor marks of a Buddha*24 and the perfect radiant glory of more
421 g'a' in this context is an epithet of the Buddha.
422 gehaag is an epithet of the Buddha.
423 བཅོམ་ལྡན་འདས་ is an epithet of Buddha and also a general title for highly esteemed
persons.
424 མཚན་དང་དཔེ་བྱད་ is commonly abbreviated as མཚན་དཔེ་ There are 32 major
marks or physical characteristics and 80 minor marks of excellence of a supreme
Buddha. The 32 are as follows: 1,5947
g hands and feet bear the
marks of a wheel, 2. རུས་སྦལ་བཞིན་དུ་ཞབས་ཤིན་ཏུ་གནས་པ་ feet are firmly set upon the
ground like a tortoise, 3.592a aagad feet and fingers are webbed,
4.541 Qar a y 9 '' hands and feet are soft and smooth,
5.959'aža' seven prominent features (these include; broad feet, broad hands, broad
shoulder blades and broad neck.), 6. སོར་མོ་རིང་བ་ long fingers, 7. རྟེང་པ་ཡངས་པ་ broad
heels, 8. སྐུ་ཆེ་ཞིང་དྲང་བ་ body is tall and straight, 9. ཞབས་ཀྱི་ལོང་བུ་མི་མངོན་པ་ ankles
do not protrude, 10. magya550'body hairs point upright,
11.gars599 Waga calves like an antelope's, 12.597255 NETTI
hands are long and beautiful, 13. མདོམས་ཀྱི་སྦ་བ་སྦུབས་སུ་ནུབ་པ་ private organ is
concealed in a sheath, 14. QaraNa nga skin is the colour of gold,
15. JANU'NTÊREN'T skin is thin and smooth, 16. Try Fau šany
འཁྱིལ་བ་ each body hair curls to the right, 17. ཞལ་མཛོད་སྤུས་བརྒྱན་པ་ face is adorned by
a small, coiled tuft of hair between the eyebrows, 18. 15:45't torso like a
lion, 19.5555a 5 2" shoulders are perfectly round, 20.gunha
shoulders are broad, 21. Faqarriva at possesses an excellent sense of taste,
22. ཤིང་ནྱ་གྲོ་དྷ་ལྟར་ཆུ་ཞེང་གབ་པ་ well proportioned body like the Indian fig/bodhi/pipal
tree, 23. 457 Stažqa has a protrusion on the crown of the head,
24.
Nak tongue is long and thin, 25.95595950'e'has a
melodious voice like Brahma, 26. QgW559'29jaws like a lion,
27. ཚེམས་ཤིན་ཏུ་དཀར་བ་ very white teeth, 28. ཚེམས་མཉམ་པ་ no gaps in between teeth,
29. margman355 teeth are evenly set, 30. Da Ngako'y has a total of
forty teeth, 31. སྤྱན་མཐོན་མཐོང་འདྲ་བ་ eyes are like the colour of sapphire,
32. སྤྱན་གྱི་རྫི་མ་བ་མཆོག་གི་རྫི་མ་དང་འདྲ་བ་ eyes are like those of a magnificent heifer.
103



-
-
---
----
by The Six Brothers: Chapter Five 2
than a hundred suns, sitting on the lotus and lion throne looking
luminous, clear and serene. ***
425
Seeing this incomparable glory,
They put their hands in a praying position and
respectfully prostrated.
The sunlight of the Conqueror's 420 deeds shone so brightly
That their hands appeared like the hands +27 of closed
water lilies.
They bowed down to the red water lily-like feet 428 of Buddha
And their jewelled crowns became embarrassed.
It was as though their faith and renunciation 429 were
competing so intensely
That their obstinate minds of desire had been banished
far away.
As rivers of their tears flowed, the wonderful light of blessing
Melted away their minds of negativity.
Their Naga King-like 430 faith moved the Buddha's cloud-like
eyes 431 of wisdom and love,
From which light rain of compassion 432fell.
Then the brothers, in front of the Blessed One, 453made offerings of
various flowers from the blue lotus 434 and the white lotus flower.435
425 ལྷམ་མེ་ལྷང་ངེ་ལྷན་ནེར་
426 རྒྱལ་བ་ is an epiihet of the Buddha.
427 maja 315 literally 'hands of a water lily', but this is a reference to the hand-
like shape of the water lily when it is closed. are white flowers or water lilies
that bloom at night. ཀུན་ད་ is synonymous with ཀུ་མུད་ and ཀུ་མུ་ད་
428 agoragas is literally 'soles of his feet'.
429 ans or discontentment with samsara.
450 A595 the Lord of the Nagas.
431 jaag is literally “cloud eyes'. There are five 'eyes' ( '2') which a Buddha
possesses. The five are: 1.aga the physical or 'flesh' eye, 2. a sg the divine
or tgod' eye, 3. ཤེས་རབ་ཀྱི་སྤྱན་ the eye of knowledge or wisdom, 4. ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྤྱན་ the
dharma' eye, 5. WAND'n the eye of inherent understanding - also known as
སངས་རྒྱས་ཀྱི་སྤྱན་ the Buddha eye.
3 ཐུགས་རྗེའི་ཆར་ཟིམ་
104



von The Six Brothers: Chapter Five cor
They also made offerings of the agaru plant 438and snake-heart
sandalwood 437 and other offerings such as these. GREAT
UNDERSTANDING then offered up praise in poetic verse,
“The blazing glory of your body,
with the marks of a supreme Buddha,
pacifies the desire of demon-nesses, and
The power of your compassion,
perfectly established by your loving kindness,
defeats the armies of the god of desire.458
When you sit with immoveable concentration
you move the six levels 439 of the realm of the
Three Thousand Worlds.440
We offer up great oceans of offerings to you the
Great Conqueror, 44 you who is free of all desires."
Then LOVING KINDNESS offered up praise,
“For liberating all migrators, you remain as long as
necessary in samsara.
433 afdaq'3gv is an epithet of the Buddha.
434 58 is a transliteration of the Sanskrit ‘uptala' – the blue lotus. This also known
as ཆུ་སྐྱེས་སྔོན་པོ། སའི་གདུ་བུ། དབང་མཆོག སྟེང་འཐུང་། མིག་གི་གཉེན།
438 52 T is a transliteration of the Sanskrit 'pundarika' - the white lotus, which is
more commonly written in Tibetan as པདྨ་དཀར་པོ་
436 k g a medicinal plant, possibly aloe vera. It is also spelled ( '5' and is
derived from Sanskrit.
437 67559a is a very rare type of sandalwood.
438 259 m 7' is literally 'the one holding the bow of flowers' and is a epithet of
the god of desire.
439 རྣམ་པ་དྲུག་
བ0 སྟོང་གསུམོ་ is an abbreviation of སྟོང་གསུམ་གྱི་འཇིག་རྟེན་ཁམས་ often translated as
*trichiliocosm' or 'third order thousand world system. It is the highest and largest of
the three order realms containing one thousand of the second thousand intermediate
order realms. This amounts to one billion worlds. (That is, 1000 - the first realm of
worlds' multiplied by 1000 - "the second realm of worlds' multiplied by 1000 - the
third order realms'.)
ས་ ཐུབ་པ་མཆོག་ is one of the epithets of the Buddha.
...
..
...
441
.
.
105
wwwww
waw



boo The Six Brothers: Chapter Five ser
For pacifying the painful heat of ignorance, you burn up
wrong perceptions by the flames of your wisdom.
For drying up the cesspool of craving, you continuously
rain down the nectar of the dharma.
For increasing the branches and leaves of excellent qualities,
you cut down the trees of cyclical existence. Oh how
wonderful!".
VIRTUOUS also offered up exaltations saying,
"The fame of your fragrance emanates afar
and gathers near all your subdued ones, 42.
The river of your empowerment flows downwards
and pulls upwards the helpless.
Always enjoying holy conduct and especially loving
the lowly,
Always revealing the hundred wrongs of attachment
and not dwelling in nirvana - we exalt you!”
Then they circumambulated towards the right. Entering another
temple they saw an image of the Blessed Buddha Manjushri 44% as
beautiful as if it were an evening cloud decorated with a rainbow.444
They prostrated and made offerings. GREAT UNDERSTANDING gave
praise saying,
"You have cut through all the bonds of samsara,
You have perfect understanding of all things,
You hold firmly a sword and scripture,
What must you be thinking to do next?
Furthermore, you will completely cut
All migrators' afflictions, establishing in them
www.studiommissie
442 གདུལ་བྱའི་ཚོགས་ are those who have been tamed or subdued by the teachings of the
Buddha. It is also another way of referring to the Buddha's disciples.
4༔ བཅོམ་ལྡན་འདས་འཇམ་དཔལ་དབྱངས་
449595 tane is a metaphor for a rainbow and also means Indra's bow,
106



.
..:
:
14. The Six Brothers: Chapter Five for
:.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
The victorious, perfect mind of Buddha..
Your sceptres 44 are oh so beautiful!"
.
.
.
. .
They proceeded on further and in the northern temple was an image of
Avalokitesvara 449 dressed in the style of a sage, as white as a great
pile of water lilies. They went up to him and touched their heads on
his feet. At that moment LOVING KINDNESS offered up praise,
“This undefiled one of white and clear light-
Are you a snow mountain or a water crystal jewel?
Since you have both the major and minor marks 447
It is your Buddha image which is the nectar of our eyes.948
You are attached to migrators' concerns and
Greatly desire to fulfil the pleasures of hungry ghosts.
You hate desire, but since you always love the world,
You have not left this existence.
When contemplating these things, your compassionate mind
Is not attached to your own happiness, and
Since you consider samsara and nirvana to be the same,
You are the king of all supremely exalted ones.”
They slowly proceeded further on. In the temple on the left they saw
the image of Vajrapani449 - the Lord of Secret Mantras, 450 whose glory
445 447W are the symbolic instruments held in the hands of deities. Manjushri
holds a sword in his right hand and scripture in his left hand. goraba is sometimes
translated as "hand signals but this is known as Sath in Tibetan, a translation of the
Sanskrit term 'mudra'.
446 PETga'ya is an epithet of Avalokitesvara also known as galva
and s hamama - the deity which represents the compassion of the Buddha...
447 55 are the major and minor marks of a Buddha. (See footnote 424.)
448 5095 literally 'that which leads or pulls', being a metaphor for the eyes..
449 99 is a Bodhisattva who is considered to be the embodiment of the might
and power of all the Buddhas. Vajrapani is also the great master of the tantric
teachings.
450 978159295 is an epithet of 591 - the 'vajra bearer'. A da so
can be translated 'Lord of Secrets though the title specifically refers to secret
teachings.
445
107



1
The Six Brothers: Chapter Five se
was like that of a mountain of vaidurya. 4)He was surrounded by
many gods of the secret mantras. 452 VIRTUOUS put his hands in a
praying position and offered up praise saying,
“Even though you have overcome anger, your face
is wrathful.
For defeating the hatred of migrators
Your vajra +5 of emptiness and compassion
Victoriously pacifies afflictions and spiritual obstacles.”
$
They then made copious offerings to the Three Jewels. The brothers
were greatly overjoyed and then went outside to the place where the
great all-knowing spiritual guide +34 was. They paid homage to him by
touching their heads on his feet. They also gave to him all that they
had and offered supplications saying,
“We have fallen into the pit of samsara and
Have been burnt by the fire of affliction,
With your hand of compassion pull us out and
Kindly satisfy us with the nectar of the dharma. ::
You are the eyes to the blind veiled in obscuration,
The wish-fulfilling gem 453 to the poor, 450
You are the one who shows the way and
The captain who leads us to the island of liberation."
451 23 is a translation from the Sanskrit ‘vaidurya'. It is a precious stone of a deep
blue colour and is considered to be the equivalent of the stone lapis lazuli. ag can
also be white, yellow or green in colour.
452 གསང་བ་པ་ also considered to be a type of demonie «yaksa' - གནོད་སྦྱིན་
453 F OTO
454 བདག་ཉིད་ཆེན་པོ་ཐམས་ཅད་མཁྱེན་པའི་བཤེས་གཉེན་
45 ཡིད་བཞིན་ནོར་ is an abbreviation of ཡིད་བཞིན་གྱི་ནོར་བུ་ , being a translation of the
Sanskrit term 'chintamani' which, in accordance with Indian tradition, was a precious
stone believed to be capable of fulfilling one's wishes. :
436 To in this context is a reference to the poor or destitute, not the miserly or
stingy.
108



boo The Six Brothers: Chapter Five goo
He replied to them saying,
"You blessed ones, who have worn the armour of valour
from long ago and whose merit is perfectly ripened,
it is wonderful that you have arrived here.
Come here, enter into the great ocean of the dharma
and I will give you whatever you desire from the
source of precious goodness and virtue.
Poor families and small pools of water 45?can not satisfy
destitute guests and those who are thirsty, but
The great ocean and the precious island 4-8 can completely
fulfil all their wishes."
Then the Great Exalted One thoroughly taught them all about
philology, 459logic, 46 sacred spiritual instructions and special
teachings. 462 The brothers fully comprehended what they had been
taught. In particular, GREAT UNDERSTANDING, who, since he
possessed a very perceptive mind, great wisdom and inner strength,
came to know the reality of the way things are and gained clear
understanding of all the meanings of the three baskets of
teachings, 463the three trainings +64 and the two types of non-identity. 463
The brothers praised the virtuous spiritual guide saying,
457 gram' is a very small body of water.
45 རིན་ཆེན་གླིང་
499 N' is 'the science of sounds', incorporating the study of grammar and philology.
460 is a translation of the Sanskrit 'pramana' and is probably better translated as
'valid cognition'.
461 fysis or holy oral teachings'.
462 547" more literally translated as “quintessential instructions'.
463 850 the three categories or 'baskets' are: 1.652AE35 teachings on
ethical discipline, 2. ağda 5 teachings on meditation and general religious
discourses, 3. všata teachings on wisdom.
464 aasaa havana the three trainings of Buddha. These are: 1. gav ethics,
2. ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན་ concentration, 3. ཤེས་རབ་ wisdom.
465 4555araga the two kinds of lack of self or identity. These are:
1.གང་ཟག་གི་བདག་མེད་ the lack of self in persons, 2. ཆོས་ཀྱི་བདག་མེད་ the lack of self
in phenomena.
109



W.
VALLALJO
L
LUT ......
.
.......
......
...
......
.
.....
.
..
.
.
...
.....
ADIR
A
...................
...
.
.
..
M
A SHALLA
boo The Six Brothers: Chapter Five me
“You revealed that all things are deluded mental
constructs, 466 yet you show us the various constructs
of the dharma.
In order to understand the inexpressible, 49? you thoroughly
expounded the various concepts of the teachings.
Even though you taught all things in many ways,
you did not contradict yourself at all. :. . :
You did not confuse all that can be known, yet you naturally
brought together all of it as one. Oh how amazing!"
ITcUTWYTYYYYYYYYMWYMYMYWYCYYYYYYYYYYYYYvTriin
Then, GREAT UNDERSTANDING, who, because of the riches of his
great learning was a treasury of intelligence and who possessed great
inner strength and excellent discernment, sincerely exhorted
VIRTUOUS, who then said to his brothers, ..
"This world is unreal like dreams, mirages and the
abode of fairies. 468
Desirous pleasures are the same as the dew of the grass,
poison or salty water.
Those who desire these are animals, inanimate matter or
insanity itself...
Therefore, abandoning all desire, we will go to .
the forest and seek nirvana.”
SON OF DESIRE said,
NOW
WWWWWWWWWWUN MAMMA M
466 VTT are mental constructs, 'formulations or elaborations which reflect the
deluded conceptual mind grasping at self. These elaborations and are in opposition to
the mind which has grasped the reality of non-identity and has thus moved towards
nirvana and therefore away from worldly cyclical existence.
467 85535is literally 'inexpressible' but is also another way of expressing
emptiness.
46* 2 is literally 'smell eat and is a type of being in the divine realm who lives by
eating various odours. Translating these beings as 'fairies' may not be entirely
accurate, but is perhaps the closest English equivalent.
IA!
110



bago The Six Brothers: Chapter Five ser
“What would we achieve in the forest by
Destroying the hopes of our birth parents, 469
Our close friends, relatives, children and wives,
And giving up our comfortable homes and all our wealth?
After we have first enjoyed the wealth of our families
And fulfilled the hopes of our friends, kin and slaves,
Then, when we are old, 47' we will practice asceticism in
the forest.
In this way, we will obtain the fruits of both this life and
the next."
VIRTUOUS then said,
“Like stars appearing in the sky during the day and
A momentary flash of lightning at night, so is
The fully endowed human life, which is obtained by:
much previous merit,
Difficult to gain and easy to lose.
469 WK N 55'' is an expression of high praise to one's parents for having given
birth to them.
470 15 was literally means youth has passed'.
7! དལ་འབྱོར་ is an abbreviation of དལ་བ་བརྒྱད་དང་འབྱོར་པ་བཅུ་ a human rebirth
which is free of the eight ‘unfree states' and possesses the ten circumstances, .-
conditions or connections' making one in an excellent position to practice the
dharma. དལ་འབྱོར་ is also often referred to as དལ་འབྱོར་ མི་ལུས་ The དལ་བ་བརྒྱད་ or
eight states of freedom are the free states of not being 1.5gra hell beings,
2. ཡི་དྭགས་ pretas, 3. དུད་འགྲོ་ animals, 4. ཀླ་ཀློ་ barbarians, 5. ལྷ་ཚེ་རིང་པོ་ long living
gods, 6. ལོག་ལྟ་ཅན་ a possessor of the wrong doctrine, 7. སངས་རྒྱས་མ་བྱོན་པ་ a person
born in the place where Buddha has not appeared, 8. གླེན་ལུགས་བཅས་མ་ཡིན་ a foof or a
mute. The འབྱོར་པ་བཅུ་ (the first five are personal conditions) are: 1:མི་ཡིན་པ་ being a
human being, 2. ganggoyne being born in a central or Buddhist land,
3.5955'' having all one's faculties (i.e. one's senses.), 4. Ayaga avama"
having not engaged in extreme wrong doings, 5. སངས་རྒྱས་ཀྱི་བསྟན་པ་ལ་དད་པ་
believing in the teachings of the Buddha, (The second five are external conditions.)
6.65wovša Buddha has appeared, 7. 45VHVİVagkv"' Buddha has
taught the dharma, 8. 99959 's Buddha's teaching still exists, 9. q uia
V¥259there are followers of the teaching, 10. aga gamasanga
una favourable conditions exist for one to have a spiritual guide.
1



1
The Six Brothers: Chapter Five se
A jewelled vase, that is worthy of holding nectar,
Should not have filth poured into it and be thrown away.
How can it be right to commit wrongs and
Squander pure lives of many excellent qualities? +7?
Relatives who cause you to destroy yourself
Are your worst enemy.
By various methods they lead you into sin and
When you fall to hell, what benefit will they be then?
The awful torment of accumulating, protecting and
Worrying about riches is brought on by yourself.
But, when your avarice leads you to the rebirth of
hungry ghosts,
Where will your home, possessions and pleasures be then?
.We
Though you have a lucid mind,
Being habituated in only deception and evil you enter
the wrong path.
Thus, when you fall down to the rebirth of animals and
Are overcome by suffering and affliction, how will you
escape?
WWW
When you have strength and youthfulness,
Your body and mind are spent on vulgar deeds.
So, when you are old, if you can not look after yourself
How will you be able to endure the hardship of
deep concentration? 473
When you have powerlessly lost all that you are attached to,
And have arrived at the mouth of the Lord of Death,
And are violently struck by the fangs of sickness,
And have entered the bowels of the lower realms,
will you then go to the forest?
472 ufa 59 agaim'TYR 45 ia is a reference to the fortunate or blessed
human lives which possess the eighteen conditions of the Garaša (See the
footnote 471 above for further explanation.)
473 བསམ་གཏན་
112



bol The Six Brothers: Chapter Five se
Those attached to dewdrop-like momentary pleasures
Forsake eternal bliss.
This despicable behaviour is even more foolish
Than one who sells many jewels in exchange for dust.
Close friends who are obstacles to liberation are
Yamah's 474 slayers. 475
Riches are the binding nooses of demons.
Those attached to this world are trapped in Yamah's ocean.
Sensual pleasures are a bonfire which burns virtue and
goodness.
.
.
.
..
.
.....
Death is certain, though the time is unknown. ..
Wherever one is born there is no eternal happiness,
Therefore, you must abandon all attachment and
Fully delight in renunciation."
..........................................................................
Having heard such logically congruous words as these, the older
brothers were not brave enough to reply. Since they had been
habituated to avarice for such along time, they were under the power
of desire, and were thus attached to the small pleasures of worldly
existence. Furthermore, being unable to comprehend the great bliss of
liberation they became terrified and panicked. And so, when it was
almost midnight, when people had stopped moving about and birds
had also taken their vows of refraining from speaking and the sky was
completely covered by a thick canopy of clouds, stopping the moon
and the stars from shining, the three older brothers fled from the
temple.
Wanting to arrive at their homes quickly, they hurried along without
hesitation and took the wrong path. They slipped down some ice, 470
which was smooth like the surface of a mirror, having been produced
by a small, cold, wild stream emanating from a mountainside, and fell
474 magis a translation of the Sanskrit “Yamah', being typically translated 'Lord of
Death'.
425 མི་ in this context is a reference to གཤིན་རྗེའི་གཤེད་མ་ - the Lord of Death"s
executioners.
476 9 can also be translated as “glacier' but in this context refers to ice.
.
.
1



www.DASP
.
WordW
alter Hatth
.
seg
W
KHWE
voor The Six Brothers: Chapter Five goor
into a very deep and extremely precipitous ravine with no path or
steps. It was as if they had fallen all the way into the terrifying mouth
of the Lord of Death. However, some old leaves, that had piled up at
the bottom of the ravine, acted as a cushion. Although they were not
injured, they now thought that they were definitely going to die.
Overcome with grief, they wailed there ceaselessly.
At daybreak the next day, the three younger brothers looked
everywhere for their older brothers. Not finding them, they thought
that they must have definitely returned to their homes. So they set
out on the path home, going with great haste. Near to the path they
heard a great wailing noise and then they saw their older brothers in
the cavernous ravine. Fed up with his older brothers, VIRTUOUS said
to his companions, "Brothers, how is it that our own kin are so
unstable and, like the flow of a river, always go only downwards?
However much we strive to help them, they still do not enter the right
path. They also hinder our renunciation. Now, what is the point of
working hard for their sakes? Leave them. Let's just go to the forest
of asceticism!”
LOVING KINDNESS replied, “Pacify your negativity! Brother, you
should not talk like this. Have we ourselves not set out to liberate all
sentient beings? What is the point of going to the forest of asceticism
if we do not even love our own brothers? We must immediately enter
the ravine and save them.” As they approached their brothers they
asked them, “Brothers what happened to you?” Prostrating before
them, they replied, "You, our own kin, who are more precious than
our lives, like lamas, you gave us good advice, but since we disobeyed
your words we have fallen here into this unbearable pain. Please
save us! From now on, we will act in accordance with your
instructions." +
7477
Consoling them, the three younger brothers went down into the steep
ravine. They dug out a path for them in the dirt on the side of the
ravine and told them to come up. But being afraid and lacking in
477 gavaona is literally “the words of a lama' but in this context refers to the
instructions of the younger brothers who were like lamas to the older brothers.
114



von The Six Brothers: Chapter Five ser
courage, the older brothers could not move and were unable to climb
out. So the younger brothers, whose great strength was equal to the
power of their merit, went down and carried out each one of them.
Then, together they all went to the great temple of MANIFEST JOY.
Made from the wood *78 of merit, enclosed by the railing
of mindfulness with the banner of courage hoisted high,
Rowed by oars of sorrow made stable by iron wires of
renunciation, led by a great, virtuous, spiritual captain,
Entering the ocean of the teachings,479
by the force of much learning, being unafraid of the
sea monster, so is ,
The great ship of perseverance 480 which quickly goes to
the Island of Liberation 481 to obtain the precious jewel of
enlightenment. Oh, how wonderful!
In summary, it can be said that sentient beings are called 'possessors
of the phenomenon of death”, that ignorance and sloth have been
shown to be evil and that sorrowful hearts encourage all virtuous
beings. It can be further stated that worship of the Three Jewels, and
highly praising the great qualities of the many learnings and the
perseverance of exalted Bodhisattvas *s are all, in the way that has
been thus described, totally outstanding.
This is chapter five.
o m www
2
a' refers to 'wood' and not trees, vines or creeping plants in this context.
asawa't is a reference to the teachings of the Buddha.
480 བརྩོན་འགྲུས་ the fourth of the six perfections.
41 ཐར་པའི་གླིང་
482 T "Great Being’ is an epithet of Buddha.
Baxxwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwww.nic.
C
5



**
*
.



CHAPTER SIX
Sometime later on, the brothers became fed up with the wrongs of
worldly existence and so they decided to put sensual pleasures behind
them. Since the sorrow of their renunciation had turned to joy, they
left the temple of MANIFEST JOY, going to a place far away in the
north in order to adhere to the asceticism of the forest. As they
travelled, they went very close by the mountain called FRAGRANT
MOUNTAIN, 483 which had heavenly sages *84 and many spirits485
dwelling there.
FRAGRANT MOUNTAIN,
Which was like another Mount Meru,
Looked extremely glorious, as if it was
The very centre of the earth.
The immeasurable size of the mountain
Appeared as if it completely filled the human realm.
It reached so high in the sky, as though
It was wanting to see the gods 450 frolic on top of
Mount Meru.
Worried that the vaidurya-like sky 487could not bear
the weight
Of the jewelled dome of stars, and would thus fall down,
The mountain had become like
Raised up pillars of vajra.
483 སྤོས་ངད་ལྡན་པའི་རི་བོ་
484 vaigsis
485 are beings in the preta or 'hungry ghost' realm who are connected with the
elements - water, earth, fire and air. They are also referred to as “elemental spirits'.
486 xq'm ' is a general name for gods or deities.
487 way is a translation from the Sanskrit "vaidurya'. It is a precious stone of a deep
blue colour and is considered to be the equivalent of the stone lapis lazuli. 23 can
also be white, yellow or green in colour.
117



PREPIRAVAANPAREPAGATTA
R TAMA
by The Six Brothers: Chapter Six moer
Young maiden clouds,
Covered in necklaces of pearl-like dew drops,
Desired the beauty of the mountain, 488
And were thus lovingly embracing it.
FRAGRANT MOUNTAIN appeared as though it was
A garden of asceticism for sages and ascetics,
A dwelling place for the lineage of great elephants, 489
A site for Shiva's great palace 49 and an abode of arhats. 491
The mountain was crowned by a rainbow, beautified
with a cotton-like upper garment of mist,
Adorned with many necklaces of brightly coloured
tree flowers,
Tied with a beautiful belt of crystal clear waterfalls,
and wrapped in a lower garment of grassy meadows --
This image, of all wonders assembled together,
is truly a magical creation by the Creator.
At that time, the brothers eyes were wide open
Being fixated on the amazing scene, and
Engulfed in great joy,
They climbed into the chariot of bliss.
The brothers, who, with their wheel-like feet,
Made virtuous footprints as they walked,
..
men
488 av a gy is literally "the owner of the forest but is an epithet of
‘mountain', in this case Fragrant Mountain,
489 maar g avn Rom is a reference to ghad551955the eight
mythological elephants which guard the world. The eight elephants are: 1. vya
2.555775 3. marcar 4. vážky 5.455 6.
7.
m g 8.CHNE (591957 is also the name of the great master of the
Buddhist tradition in India who lived during the later part of the 6th century. He was
one of the six great masters of the paras DEVO:19:57").
49025961555 taga' refers to Shiva's palace and not a palace of a lion.
49 གྲུབ་པ is equivalent to དགྲ་བཅོམ་པ་ ཨ a translation of the Sanskrit tarhat', meaning
one who has overcome or subdued enemies. The term can also be used as a reference
to Bodhisattvas and Buddhas.
118



boo The Six Brothers: Chapter Six yer
Had beads of sweat put on their cheeks
By the fingers of the sun's rays.
With tired flute-like breath and
Wavering dances, they proceeded on.
And fairy-like, they passed through
Many places on the mountain side.
The brothers then slowly went to the great forest on the mountain side,
which was covered with many attractive green meadows. Adorning
the meadows were blooming, fresh flowers of myriads of colours.
Bees gathered there were singing beautiful melodies as they buzzed
around.492 Filling the entire area were all kinds of beautiful coloured
trees with long branches and big leaves. Trees such as the snake-heart
sandalwood tree,493 tamala trees,494 asoka trees, 495 bala trees, 496 and fig
trees.497 Blown by the cool breeze, the whistling and dancing of the
vines and bamboo was enchanting. The water descending from the
mountainside, which was making a lovely cascading sound, was
perfectly clear. There were also rock ledges made of variously shaped
mountain boulders where ascetics were striving to achieve spiritual
power. The brothers slowly made their way through this great forest.
At that time, SON OF DESIRE then exclaimed, "Hey, friends, think
clearly about this! It is said that there is a place for the gods'
enjoyment called THE PARK OF MEETING.498 Look, has it moved here?
492 and is an abbreviation of Wala
493 ཙན་དན་སྦྲུལ་གྱི་སྙིང་པོ་ is a very rare type of sandalwood.
g ia is a transliteration from Sanskrit and is translated as the 'xanthochymus
pictorius tree' or the 'vitex nmegundo tree'.
g 5 35 is a type of tree in India, with long leaves and red flowers.
496 qrar is a transliteration from Sanskrit. It is unclear what type of tree this is.
497 'E is a type of Indian fig tree.
498 འདྲེས་པའི་ཚལ་ is the name of one of the parks surrounding གྲོང་ཁྱེར་ལྟ་ན་སྡུག་ the
‘Lovely Looking City', which is situated in the middle of the divine realm. It is
typically translated "The Park of Various Activities', but the park is specifically for
male and female gods to meet together and enjoy one another:
119



bo The Six Brothers: Chapter Six ze
When the fresh winds, perfumed with the smell of the
snake-heart sandalwood,
Sweetly play their lutes, the small trees, with beautifully
coiled leaves of hair,
Dance around everywhere giving auspicious greetings.
The hands of their branches are placed in a praying position
and they scatter around ripe fruit, welcoming us as guests.
The stream goddess, 49% decorated with a necklace of bubble
beads like a string of glass crystals,
With her clothes of waves appearing to fall off, sprinkles the
purple petals of flowers
Beautifying them like a net of water droplet pearls.
The lips of these flowers open up, and showing their teeth of
anthers, they laugh.
Beautifully feathered birds, by their charming performances,
talk pleasantly to one another.
To these captivating and beautiful sounds,animals listen with
erect, unmoving ears.
Deers with very thin waists and extremely beautiful limbs,
without fear,
Leisurely dwell in the rock clefts of brilliantly coloured
boulders, as though they were practicing sages.”
SON OF DESIRE further added, “There is nothing more to say. This
forest fills our hearts with great joy."
Then GREAT UNDERSTANDING said,
"Highly praising its infinite qualities :
Wise people call this 'the forest of asceticism'.
To people afflicted with the clamour of worldly affairs,
This forest is a cool shade of rest.
499 ŠANSV' is an epithet of the sky, a poetic name for women, a poetic epithet of
'evening', an epithet of the goddess Paldan Lhamo (
F iat ) and a poetic
reference to goddesses in general.
120



bigo The Six Brothers: Chapter Six Foer
If migrators rely on courageous ones,
they will not be overcome by enemies,
and if they are sheltered by a broad umbrella,
They will not be harmed by raindrops,
and if they wear strong armour they will not be
harmed by weapons.
If one's body and mind can virtuously dwell in solitary,
one will not be contaminated with desire, deceit,
evil conduct and all non-virtue, and
One will naturally obtain nirvana.”
Keeping these things in their hearts, the brothers continued onward.
Travelling along, their beauty appeared like that of young gods
traversing Mount Meru's slope of pure vaidurya, 5 and constellations
moving in the pure autumn sky. They arrived at the forest and present
there were some young ascetics who were diligently studying and
chanting. The ascetics gazed upon the beauty of the six brothers'
bodies and their blazing glory. In a state of consternation they put
their hands in a praying position and uttered these words, “Oh, gods,
how great that you have come here! Please fulfil our wishes. Are you
Indra, the Lord of the heavens, or Shiva? 301 Perhaps you are the Lord
of Wealth, or the Lord of the Ocean -Naga Visuki, 302 or perhaps you
are the Creator of the world - the four faced Brahma 503 and you have
500 Mt. Meru is believed to be founded on a base of gold and has four sides or faces.
The north face is made of gold, the south face of vaidurya (or 'lapis lazuli'), the east
face of silver and the west face of red crystal. (23 is a translation from the Sanskrit
"vaidurya'. It is a precious stone of a deep blue colour and is considered to be the
equivalent of the stone lapis lazuli. I can also be white, yellow or green in
colour.)
301 a 995955' is an epithet of Shiva. (literally: ‘a portion of the crest of the
moon'.)
50 རྒྱ་མཚོའི་དབང་པོ་ནོར་རྒྱས་ the Naga Vasuki (ནོར་རྒྱས་ ) is one of the eight Naga
Kings. Nagas are considered to be half-human, half-serpent like beings who inhabit
oceans, lakes and rivers. It is believed that they can cause much harm to humans if
disturbed. The A 925 - the eight great Nagas - are: 1.giggur Ananta',
2. འཇོག་པོ་ “Takshaka', 3. སྟོབས་རྒྱུ་ «Karkotaka, 4.རིགས་ལྡན་ Kulika', 5. ནོར་རྒྱས་བུ་
‘Vasuki', 6.5555 Sankhapala', 7. 615* 'Padma', 8. WIF* *Varuna’, (Other lists
of the eight Nagas substitute H'37* 'Varuna' with 256 Mahapadma'.)
503 RÊT155357žsisaar is more commonly known as avat
121



von The Six Brothers: Chapter Six se
come here to save us? If this is the case, we have certainly been born
from hundreds of seeds of virtuous goodness and the fruits of an
endowed life. "504
GREAT UNDERSTANDING answered them saying, "Friends, may your
virtue greatly increase! We are not gods, Nagas, the proud Brahma or
yaska."" We are ones who practice the asceticism of Bodhisattvas,
having cut the noose of desire and crossed over the wall of the
commotion of worldly affairs. We carry the responsibility of the
burden of sentient beings, desiring to take them and ourselves to the
other side of the ocean of samsara. 507
Is there one here who can revive the frightened,
who happily gives
The infinite nectar of the holy dharma
without becoming fatigued, who,
With the undefiled consciousness
of the sharp surgical eye instrument, 308
that clears away blurred vision,
Shows the correct path of liberation to blind migrators?”
They replied, “Oh, young friends! This is excellent. The forest of
asceticism is replete with fruit and roots to eat, being a place without
harm and appropriate for the learned to reside. PURE WISDOM,309 a
great exalted Bodhisattva, lives here. He has made many offerings to
past Buddhas, established the foundation of virtue, and from long ago
has participated in helping all sentient beings. The water of loving
504 geurgangas refers to the fruits of a life that is fully endowed or connected to
practice the dharma, དལ་འབྱོར་ is also often referred to as དལ་འབྱོར་མི་ལུས་ a human
rebirth which is free of the eight ‘unfree states' and possesses the ten circumstances,
conditions or connections making one highly conducive to practicing the dharma.
See footnote no. 471 for a fuller explanation.
505 4 5 g * are 'yaska' demons who inhabit the earth and lower heavenly realms.
They are malevolent spirits who are particularly intent on harming humans.
506 Danang literally carry on our heads the burden of sentient beings.
807 Thát is, for the purpose of liberation.
508 aast' is a traditional Tibetan instrument used for removing cataracts.
509 དྲི་མ་མེད་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས་བློ་གྲོས་
122



by The Six Brothers: Chapter Six coer
kindness and compassion has watered his mind well, and many seeds
of virtue have been planted. These seeds have born forth boundless
shoots, flowers, tree trunks and leaves of perfect retention, great
concentration, higher perceptions, branches of enlightenment,572 the
fruit of liberation, and perfect liberation from this world. He is here as
a saviour of the divine and human realms. At first, you should take
refuge in him and then you will obtain all the qualities of the
transcendental perfections." 51% In poetic verse they further added,
“PURE WISDOM is
A great ocean of dharma,
Containing immeasurable treasures of precious qualities,
Which, like satisfying Naga Kings, satisfy blessed disciples.
SWAR
His exalted knowledge is vast like the sky,
his mind is as deep as an unfathomable ocean.
A
RANGWA WANAKUPEWA
510 གཟུངས་ in this context refers to མི་བརྗེད་གཟུངས་ - a special ability to remember
perfectly what one has learned and seen, being something akin to a perfect
photographic memory. (9351' or 'dharanis' are mantras, spells, mystical charms,
incantations or formulae often referred to as 35'War There are four types of
225V 1. ažquamv 'perseverance incantation', 2. gad935* 'mantra
incantation', 3. DV 2435v dharma incantation', 4.790735V 'meaning
incantation'.)
51 མངོན་པར་ཤེས་པ་ are extra sensory perceptions or understandings which are not only
the clairvoyant ability of foreknowledge, but also the ability of mind-reading and past
recollections. There are six types of w ater (although some lists only contain
five.). The six are: 1. Bravgaža the miracle perception, 2. majapat
མངོན་ཤེས་ the divine eye perception, 3. ལྷའི་རྣ་བའི་མངོན་ཤེས་ the divine ear
perception, 4. šīmoveVg99 q alay the perception of previous existences,
5. གཞན་སེམས་ཤེས་པའི་མངོན་ཤེས་ the perception of other people's thoughts,
6. ཟག་པ་ཟད་པའི་མངོན་ཤེས་ the perception of the end of contamination.
512955 w as the limbs, branches or divisions of enlightenment. There are 37
factors or attributes which are harmonious with enlightenment. (See footnote 525.)
The seven primary ones, which are in an equilibrium state of wisdom and
concentration, are: 1. དྲན་པ་ mindfulness, 2. ཆོས་ཀྱི་རྣམ་འབྱེད་ discernment of the
dharmas, 3. བརྩོན་འགྲུས་ perseverance, 4. དགའ་བ་ joy, 5. ཤིན་སྦྱངས་ pliancy,
6. བཏང་སྙོམས་ equanimity,7. ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན་ concentration.
513 maggique
123



boo The Six Brothers: Chapter Six zoo
He is steadfast like Mount Meru,and his wisdom
is more radiant than one hundred suns.
Like the wish-fulfilling tree he gives happiness to migrators,
and his courage is fearless like that of a lion.
He is like a captain showing the right way,
and like the dust of the earth his qualities can not be
counted.”
Having drunk the nectar of these
Amazing and seemly words,
They were so full of happiness that
They left from there as if wanting to fly.
TÜD YO
The green leafed fans of the forest -
Clothed in a beautiful garment of
Smoke from burnt offerings $15.-
Were beckoning them to come quickly.
Being led by purple footprints of sages,
Which auspiciously marked the path,
They saw the places full of arhats, 916
And, one by one, those dwellings of bliss.
S
MIMMATAMU
After observing the abodes of the arhats, they slowly reached the peak
of FRAGRANT MOUNTAIN." The top of the mountain was stacked up
with pieces of blue vaidurya boulders, and some of the rock clefts
looked like rainbows. The peak was laden with trees and many kinds
WWWwwwwwwwwwww.wwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwww
514 རི་དབང་ is an abbreviation of རི་རྒྱལ་ལྷུན་པོ་ - Mount Meru.
sis aa gay or 'fire puja' are burnt offerings for the purpose of appeasing the gods and
driving away demons. The burnt offerings of tirthikas include offering animals, but in
Buddhism this is forbidden. There are 12 main substances used for burnt offerings.
These are: 1. wwas a particular type of wood, 2.0ie melted butter,
3. Ens sesame seed, 4. For quitch grass, 5. Su rice, 6. a cooked yoghurt,
7. T9 kusha grass, 8. 405mm mustard seed, 9. ' ' thick-shelled barley,
10. qar barley. 11. gqm' green peas 12. of wheat.
5l6 གྲུབ་པ་ is equivalent to དགྲ་བཅོམ་པ་ a translation of the Sanskrit *arhat' and means
one who has overcome enemies. The term can also be used as a reference to
Bodhisattvas and Buddhas.
317 སྤོས་ངད་ལྡན་པའི་རི་བོ་



..
.
von The Six Brothers: Chapter Six ge
...
.
..........
..
of flowers. Constantly present there was the divine smell of
sandalwood. In this holy place called THE SOURCE OF NECTAR,S18 the
great Bodhisattva PURE WISDOM lived together with his disciples. He
sat there like the undefiled sun, 59 surrounded by thousands of rays of
light. At that moment, with the crown of their hair decorated in gold
jewels and looking like swirls of smoke, the brothers prostrated at the
feet of the Bodhisattva. 20 Offering to him all they had, they put their
hands in a praying position and praised him,
.........
....
...
.....
“Mount Meru is the centre of all mountains,
the moon is the brightest of all constellations,
The eagle has the greatest power of flight of all birds, the
wish-fulfilling tree is the most expansive of all flourishing
trees,
The wonderful wishing gem is the most valuable of all
precious jewels,
So, in this way, you have immeasurably more excellent
qualities than many masters, you the highest exalted one!
....
nawawa
ncah
WPAWPAWANYA
We, who are prisoners of samsara,
are tightly bound by the noose of karma and
shackled by the iron fetters of ignorance,
Have fallen into the pit of rebirth,
which burns with the fire of ageing and sickness, and
By Yamah's $22sword we will quickly have our lives cut.
Please completely free us and lead us to an unparalleled,
sublime level.”
M W"Winterwania
w
w
w
Then, the great exalted Bodhisattva put his golden lotus-like hands on
the brothers' heads and purifying them, graciously replied,
.www.wowego wyrowius-RSRW W
"Your excellent arrival is due
To the power of the tree of virtue and merit,
WWWW
is also an epithet of the moon.
518 255 5597
519 ཉི་མའི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་
52༠ བདག་ཉིད་ཆེན་པོ་
521 དབང་གི་རྒྱལ་པོ་
219 ST
522 R 25T
E YN
125



6The Six Brothers: Chapter Six
m
Which is always accustomed to bearing
Blessed ripe fruit.
I will give a nectar
Which you have drunk before
In your many rebirths -
Which are like spokes $23of a wheel.
inimum WWW
MANY
Actually, I will give you the cool nectar of the holy dharma,
Which removes all the pain of migrators' afflictions.
Take this nectar in the vast jewelled receptacle
Of your own understanding. 524
Climb the jewelled staircase of the thirty seven stages, 523
Which are marked with the sign of the auspicious wheel
AMA WA
$23 Ž is the spoke or blade of a wheel.
52* བློ་གྲོས་ཀྱི་རིན་ཆེན་སྣོད་ are the qualities necessary for a practitioner to be a worthy
receptacle of the dharma. There are three common faults of those who wish to be
receptacles of the dharma known as the སྣོད་ཀྱི་སྐྱོན་གསུམ་ These are: 1. སྣོད་ཁ་སྦུབས་པ་
the receptacle which is turned upside down and thus pays no attention to the
teachings, 2.5 o z as the receptacle which has a hole in the base and thus can
not remember any of the teachings, 3. 51. gg the defiled receptacle which
pollutes all that it hears.
528 garga59is an abbreviation of 555 ŠVYT54999" the 37
stages/factors of enlightenment - also known as 35šavagg. These are:
1. དྲན་པ་ཉེར་བཞག་བཞི་ the four contemplations of awareness/the four close
contemplations of applications of mindfulness - (1.005 aatraas' close
contemplation of the body, 2. Bag a an 20't close contemplation of
feelings, 3. avgqE 90675 close contemplation of mind,
4. Vg97aa999r close contemplation of dharma.), 2. 6155972
སློང་ཡ་བཞི་ the four right abandonments -- (1.མི་དགེ་བ་སྐྱེས་པ་སྤོང་བ་ the aspiration that
non-virtue which has arisen be renounced, 2.
5
9 5 the
aspiration that non-virtue which has not arisen not be generated,
3. དགེ་བ་མ་སྐྱེས་པ་བསྐྱེད་པ་ the aspiration that virtue that has not arisen be generated
4.5019 ă the aspiration that virtue that has arisen be increased.),
3. ASTF5Tga the four limbs of miracles - (1.2555aznoggvî 15't the
miracle limb of aspiration, 2. Rava nger 5'47" the miracle limb of the mind,
3. agaavia RSV 45-47 the miracle limb of perseverance. 4.5555
འཕྲུལ་གྱི་རྐང་པ་ the miracle limb of discernment.) 4, རྣམ་བྱང་གི་དབང་པོ་ལྔ་ the five
126



body The Six Brothers: Chapter Six ye
Of red footprints of the previous VICTORIOUS ONES. 526
Then you will escape from the frightening pit of samsara.
Desirous craving is the demonic noose which binds all
migrators over and over-
You must completely cut it with the sword of asceticism.
The ground that produces the shoots of various sufferings
is the cesspool of ignorance -
You must dry it up with the sun of wisdom. 2
Shine the light of the lamp of wisdom toward the confusion
caused by dark ignorance.
Traverse the fast flowing river of desire with the ship
of morality.
Put out the bonfire of anger with the cool waters
of forbearance.
Cross over the cesspool of sloth by the power
of perseverance.
Cut through the nets of avarice with the knife$28 of generosity.
Wash impure, wrong concepts with the waters of
concentration, and
faculties of complete purity (1.55'* faith, 2.97 T'Agn perseverance, 3.50
mindfulness, 4. ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན་ concentration, 5. ཤེས་རབ་ wisdom.) 5. རྣམ་བྱང་གི་སྟོབས་ལྔ་
the five powers of purity - (these are the same as the 595g" but with an emphasis
on them being forces or strengths.)
6.35*70 W 20559 the seven branches of enlightenment -(1.595
mindfulness, 2. ཆོས་ཀྱི་རྣམ་འབྱེད་ discernment of the dharmas, 3. བརྩོན་འགྲུས་
perseverance, 4. དགའ་བ་ joy, 5. ཤིན་སྦྱངས་ pliancy, 6. བཏང་སྙོམས་ equanimity,
7. 95TRETconcentration.), 7. Qanuarwin'55' the eight branches of the
eightfold nobie path -- (1. ཡང་དག་པའི་ལྟ་བ་ ight doctrine, 2. ཡང་དག་པའི་རྟོག་པ་ right
thought, 3. ཡང་དག་པའི་ངག་ right speech, 4. ཡང་དག་པའི་ལས་ཀྱི་མཐའ་ right action,
5. ཡང་དག་པའི་འཚོ་བ་ right iivelihood, 6. ཡང་དག་པའི་རྩོལ་བ་ right effort,
7.65545259'5 right mindfulness, 8.655 ep a right
concentration.).
528 སྔོན་གྱི་རྒྱལ་བ་རྣམས་ is a reference to previous Buddhas.
527 ཡེ་ཤེས་ཉི་མ་
528 vast is literally 'weapon', but in this context refers to a knife or sword.
127



boo The Six Brothers: Chapter Six for
With the mind of equanimity, which is powerful like
an elephant,
Completely destroy the forest of jealousy.
WWW
With the noose of mindfulness and concentration be
steadfast.
Bring under control the elephant 529mind,
which is drunk on the chang 530of desire,
Separated from the hook of alertness, and trampling
through the forest of sin and seduction
Falls into the lower realms.
WWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWW
Abandon all pointless bodily conduct.
Do not engage in foolish gossip.
Do not let your minds be attached to peaceful bliss,
rather be totally focussed."
Then, the bubbles of wrong concepts will be quickly
absorbed into the sea.
The sinking waters of lethargy can be passed over
by the power of alertness, and
If unbound by the deer of preconceived ideas,
the mind will dwell in peace.
Infectious craving can be purified by the mind of
non-attachment.
The snake knot of doubt can untie itself
by understanding its inherent nature.
Water that is not agitated becomes pure and
Mirrors that have been wiped clean clearly reflect images.
529 mayor" is literally "possessing a limb/trunk”, being a metaphor for elephant.
530 55 is Tibetan beer or liquor brewed from barley or rice. It is pronounced "chung'.
06* can also refer to alcohol in general.
$31 ay literally 'one-pointedness'.
128



boom The Six Brothers: Chapter Six Joer
In this way, unadulterated minds also naturally 332
become pure and thus
See perfectly through mindfulness and alertness.
Meditative concentration is a rest to those who wander
around lonely places,
An excellent medicine for various tormenting afflictions, and
A nectar for nourishing the body of virtue.
Therefore, you who are earnestly striving must practice it."
Hearing such fitting and liberating words, which sounded like the
sweet sounding voice of Brahma, » the brothers were satisfied,
greatly delighted, overjoyed and their minds were in a state of mental
bliss. They lived in huts made of leaves and dwelled on rock ledges.
Like showing respect to the crown jewels, they greatly venerated the
perfect virtuous spiritual guide. They practiced earnestly in
accordance with the spiritual instructions they received. Their conduct
was self-disciplined and gentle. Through blissful"4and peaceful
ascetic practices, they obtained completely pure minds and bodies.
Though they single-mindedly concentrated in this way, the older
brothers, because of the force of the latent habitual evil deeds of their
past, began to miss all their previous pleasures. Ascetic practices
made them tired and depressed. Having gone outside their huts, they
looked in the direction of their homeland. SON OF DESIRE then
exclaimed,
“Oh my! In our houses of latticed windows,
our lovers with beautiful pimba-like lips,who,
having put down
The red vase of their cheeks, which are full of the water of
tears, onto the stand of their smooth lotus stem-like hands,
53? ལྷན་གྲུབ་ཀྱི་དེ་བཞིན་ཉིད་ refers to the mind of the Buddha which is inherently pure
from the very beginning and which all sentients possess yet have not discovered or
fully realised.
533515105950193
534 བསིལ་བ་ in this context refers to བདེ་བ་ “happiness or bliss'.
535 བིམ་པ་ is a transliteration from Sanskrit. བིམ་པ་ is a red lip-shaped fruit found in
India.
129



1
The Six Brothers: Chapter Six ser
Whose sighs of sweet smelling sandalwood move the foliage
of their hair,
Lament that they miss us - we who are inherently wicked.
Though I do not hear the lute of your wailing,
my ears are in pain. Oh my beloved, 530
Though you are not in my presence, my heart clearly sees
your young, smooth water lily-like "5" figure.
Like piercing it with a knife, so you are hurting my heart,
you who previously met my insatiable desire.
Alas, you, the beautiful krishnasara antelope 538 are causing
me pain.
Even though you are a long way away, it is as though you
are inside me and the great difficulty of reaching you is
destroying me."
VIOLENCE added,
"Oh, the sound of when I struck the hard metal-like string
of my bow, :
Was like a clap of thunder, and when enemies heard this,
their hearts quivered like vines blowing in the wind.
Now those enemies, knowing that I have no weapons and
that I am like a tusk-less elephant
Go about fearlessly like lions."
DARKNESS then spoke saying,
336 sag'a literally "moon-like lady', being in this context an affectionate reference
to one's wife or lover.
537 ཀུན་ད་ a white flower that blooms at night. ཀུན་ད་ is synonymous with ཀུ་མུད་ and
ཀུ་མུ་ད་
538 617 is the black and white spotted antelope. It is known for its gentleness and
is a symbol of good luck. TANT is also spelled A'Fr' and is also known as
ཁྲི་སྙན་སཱ་ར་ or རི་དྭགས་ཁྲི་སྙན་ or just ཁྲི་སྙན་
གནམ་ལྕགས་ is an abbreviation of གནམ་ལྕགས་སྒྲ་ - the sound of thunder.
3.39 Myerzchni
130
SCRIS



.
N
V
The Six Brothers: Chapter Six Zer
"Oh, we who have left our families and bow down to others,
having forsaken meaningful work we are diligently
practicing pointless asceticism.
Having thrown away Lord of Wealth-like riches, $40
as if they were chaff, we live on grass and bark,
and having discarded precious jewellery we have
obtained these patched-up clothes.
Having forsaken sumptuous food, we live our lives
eating wild roots, and abandoning normal behaviour
we can not sleep and wake when we please.
What is the point of that which is called 'meditative
concentration'? The thief of striving after asceticism
has successfully destroyed me in this far away place."
Even though the older brothers entered into a cave, they did not
pursue meditative concentration but passed the time by only sleeping
and being distracted with other things. Realising what was happening,
the great Bodhisattva PURE WISDOM, summoned the older brothers
and instructed them,
"When liberated from the blazing turmoil of the pit of fire 34!
You should never enter it again.
Having renounced all the flaws of families, 342
You dwell in the forest of peace; and now do you again miss
your families?
Through great hardship you have found the boat which
liberates from
The ocean of samsara -- the beginning and end of which can
not be seen.
5% ལུས་ངན་ is also known as རྣམ་ཐོས་སས་ The Lord of Wealth is one of the four great
kings, ruling over the northern region. He is also known as the ruler of the
m a ,
(from the Sanskrit ‘yaksa'), the malevolent, harm bringing demons.
$415 is a metaphorical reference to worldly or ‘samsaric existence.
542 Bayv' as a noun means “renunciant' or one who has left home to become a
monk. In this context the noun phrase is 1979 a Bar - the hundreds of faults
of homes/families'.
131



RAMMA W
1
The Six Brothers: Chapter Six ser
ebsite
Having now chopped it up with the axe of ignorance,
The violent waves of affliction are destroying it.
www.www
.
MYWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWW
From ages past you have never been freed from the very
heavy burden of suffering,
And yet this burden has not completely exhausted you.
However, putting on the jewelled crown of asceticism,
which is for your benefit,
Has fatigued you - Oh how strange!
W WWWWARNINH
You are not renouncing attachment to worldly pleasures,
Which destroy the body like sweet tasting poison.
Yet, it is as though you are throwing away the beautiful vase
of the nectar
Of the unsurpassed, inexhaustible great bliss of the
holy dharma.
Clouds shaken up by a violent hurricane
Do not get the chance to gather together in the sky as
one mass.
In this way, the mind distracted by wrong perceptions 143
Does not have the chance to grasp wonderful qualities.
He who has a house with a beautiful jewelled archway 344
lies down exhausted, and his body,
Which always requires cleansing, is washed thoroughly by
his sweat, and the hot breath of fatigue makes his throat
dry.
He grabs the noose of his lover's hair, who provides only
momentary happiness, and she strangles his throat and
wounds him with her fingernails.
Like being pierced by an arrow, so are their scornful,
cursing words, and closing up like a lotus their minds
become trapped like bees.
MISSA
543 རྟོགས་པ་ should be read as རྟོག་པ་ in this instance.
544 Sign is generally referred to as a dismount platform for alighting from a horse.
However, it also refers to the decorative archway on the top of the gates of temples,
monasteries, palaces and large houses.
132



2000 The Six Brothers: Chapter Six Zer
Friends and relatives say unpleasant things that make one
distraught, and enemies cause one harm like the
irreversible covering of darkness at the end of time.
When you have wealth it never satisfies, it is difficult to
protect and
Being quickly lost, it causes one to cry and thus brings
countless sufferings like endless, violent waves.
The things one does not desire rain down like a flood,
but the things one does desire are as difficult to find
as gold in the dark.
wwwwwwwwwwww.
Therefore, completely let go of attachment to worldly
families, which have many faults, and give up those
pointless deeds which overcome you.
Aspire to the bliss of liberation, practice asceticism,
steadfastly and single-mindedly remain in meditative
concentration.
The differences between the faults of samsara
and the virtues of liberation are such that if people,
over millions of aeons, 14) were transformed into
Millions of bodies each also with a million tongues,
without ceasing, could not even count them all.”
SSSSS
546
He instructed them in this manner and the brothers acted in
accordance with what the great exalted one had taught. GREAT
UNDERSTANDING and the other brothers practiced perseverance, 140
accomplishment,547 and diligence. A little while later on, because of
their earnest practice, the brothers obtained the four concentrations, 148
545 ONVEIST' is a translation of the Sanskrit ‘kalpa'.
546 af a
547 w at is a translation from the Sanskrit ‘sadhana'.
548 say00759919 the four concentrations are progressive stages. They are:
1. འདོད་པའི་བདེ་བ་ལ་ཆགས་པ་སྤངས་ being free of attachment to worldly desires,
2.རྟོག་པ་དང་དཔྱོད་པ་སྤངས་ being free of wrong perceptions and analytical
investigation, 3. སེམས་དགའ་བ་སྤངས་ being free of joyfulness, 4. འཚོ་བ་བདེ་བ་དང་
so' S y being free of life's pleasures and sufferings. (915' in this context
does not mean to forsake or renounce, but rather that things such as attachment, desire
and so forth are not present at each particular stage.)
S SSSSSSSSSSSSSS
133



by The Six Brothers: Chapter Six Se
the immeasurables, 549 the meditative equipoise of formlessness, 350 the
surpassing sensory states,"" higher perceptions,"\2 and hundreds of
thousands of doors of meditative concentration. 553
Having been washed by the water of peace,
their minds became pure, and
Remaining in concentration, their eyes became
immoveable and tranquil.
Through hundreds of great meditative concentrations
they entered into
The treasury of the dharma, which is replete with many
excellent qualities.
Who can measure the depths of the ocean of concentration
which is the precious origin of the branches of
enlightenment?
An ocean which collects well thousands of streams of
instructions, is controlled by the alertness of the
Lord of Nagas,
Has rising waves of miraculous meditative absorption,
is full of many jewels of higher perceptions, and whose
Great width and depth of liberation can not be dried up
by the fire of affliction.
ka
549 Ng there are four ‘immeasurables'. They are: 1. ga n ga
immeasurable loving kindness, 2. 35 Tag immeasurable compassion,
3.591905 og immeasurable joy, 4.965 vagang immeasurable
equanimity.'
550 གཟུགས་མེད་པའི་སྙོམས་པར་འཇུག་པ་ there are four meditative states of formlessness;
1.qaqagqux infinite space, 2. Gravaggur infinite consciousness,
3. ཅི་ཡང་མེད་པ་ complete nothingness,
4.25 garaging ang 'cognitionless' or 'without discrimination or non-
discrimination'. E t is synonymous with again )
351 ཟིལ་གྱིས་གནོན་པའི་སྐྱེ་མཆེད་ there are twelve surpassing sensory states or tsensory
fields'. The twelve are: 1. bat eye, 2. F9 ear, 3. ' nose, 4. El tongue, 5. av
body, 6.7 mind, 7.43972form, 8. sound, 9. @ smell, 10. taste,
11.1999 touch, 12. FA dharma.
552 avat av see footnote number 511 for an explanation.
553 ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན་གྱི་སྒོ་
134



boo The Six Brothers: Chapter Six yer
In summary, it can be said that the forest of asceticism is a place free
of desires and far removed from the phenomenon of non-virtue. It can
further be stated that the distracted mind is the origin of much wrong
doing and that peace produces all excellent qualities. I also offer high
praise to meditative concentration and exhort you to respectfully listen
to the dharma.
This is chapter six.
PO
SUSAS
135



.....
"
is "aller;
.:
:
::
..
..
.
.
.
.
...



com.
.
los and active items
. de maio
CHAPTER SEVEN
AWARAWwwwwwwwwwwwwwww 6*
Shortly afterwards, the whole area became full of the glory of late
springs and the wind from the south was causing all beings to be
distracted with the desire to play and various trees and flowers were in
bloom. At this time, the great Bodhisattva PURE WISDOM and his
disciples, together with GREAT UNDERSTANDING and his brothers,
slowly walked around the peak of FRAGRANT MOUNTAIN and through
its numerous attractive rocky outcrops, forests and beautiful herbal
groves. After walking for some time, they eventually arrived at the
wish-fulfilling lake called SPARKLING COOLNESS, 587 which was
situated on one side of the mountain. The lake was full of pure water
possessing the eight qualities»&and was as blue as melted vaidurya.
SPARKLING COOLNESS was covered with lotus flowers, blue and white
lotuses and water lilies. Golden geese, cranes and a variety of water
fowls came to wash themselves, scattering water everywhere with
their red, coral-like feet. Surrounding the lake were trees of agaru, 560
white sandalwood,561 juniper, 562 cardamom, 563 fig, 564 plantains and
WerksamsverwwwwwwwwwwwALHUMORATTAVANGER
W
W
W
WWWWWWW
W
55༄༅ དཔལ་གྱི་དྲ་བས་ཕྱོགས་ཀུན་ཡོངས་སུ་བཅིངས་ is iterally the whole area was bound by
the web of the glory of late spring”.
$55 91 is also spelled av
538 འབིགས་བྱེད་ཀྱི་རླུང་ is a reference to the southern wind which blows from the
waru mountain range in southern India. This range is thought to be the western
Ghauts in southern India and contains many types of sandalwood trees. Gaag is
also the name of a mountain in southern India and is a metaphor for 'lightning'.
557 550'
S58
W 20723589 'water possessing eight qualities”. The eight qualities are:
1.བསིལ་བ་ cooiness, 2.ཞིམ་པོ་ sweetness, 3. ཡང་བ་ lightness, 4. འཇམ་པ་ smoothness,
5. དངས་བ་ clearness, 6. གཙང་བ་ cleanliness. 7. མགྲིན་པ་ལ་མི་གནོད་པ་ not harmful to
the throat, 8. ğ qaraga beneficial to the stomach.
99 57°51' is synonymous with 550*
So if a medicinal plant, possibly aloe vera. It is also spelled (95 and is
derived from Sanskrit.
S6 S553 NAIKI
W
$62
563 55 an Indian spice plant.
W
137
WWW



1
The Six Brothers: Chapter Seven ber
various other kinds of trees and vines. It was as though these beautiful
blooming trees had gathered there together to gaze at the wish-
fulfilling lake. The peacocks, parrots, shang shangs Sand
sparrowsso? were singing joyful songs, as if they were offering praises
to the lake.
Then, with far-seeing meritorious eyes,
Which were like lotus. petals,
They saw the pure nectar lake
With its beautiful coiled patterns,
Like a garland of crystal and a net of pearls,
So were the beautiful bubbles which covered the lake.
Wanting to make a competition between the different colours,
It was as if someone had stolen the stars. 568
The lines of ripples,
Stirred up by the fingers 569 of the breeze,
With their rings of hovering bees,
Were lifting upwards the wonders of the lake.
* ཨ་ཤུ་དྡྷ་ also known as the བྱང་ཆུབ་ལྗོན་ཤིང་ or the Bodhi tree, an Indian fig tree
under which the Buddha was enlightened.
565 95 or water tree'. Also known as the m5 tree. This is an annual tree which
produces only one crop of fruit and then dies.'
300 gigs the 'shang shang' is a mythical bird which is said to have been a large
half-human and half-eagle being. It is believed that the shang shang' would play
cymbals as it flew, hence the name 'shang shang' was derived from that sound.
op/ ཀ་ལནཱ་ is also spelled ཀ་ལན་ཏ་ཀ་ but is commonly known as the མཚིལ་པ་ or
Aga' - a sparrow.
568 The meaning of these two lines is that the lake was so beautiful that it looked like
someone had wanted to have a competition between all the different colours there and
so had stolen the stars from the sky and put them on the lake in order to see which
colours were the most beautiful or brightest. An alternative rendering could be:
The beauty was like someone had wanted to compare all the colours and
So had stolen the stars (and put them on the lake).
509 q in this context means 'fingers'. (9 is also the name of an important
star in zodiac calculations and is further known as ལྷ་མཚམས་ and མཛའ་བའི་ལྷ་)
138



The Six Brothers: Chapter Seven Ber
The fingers of young kusha grass, 570
Which were bright green like a peacock's neck,
Were scattering water droplets everywhere.
As if washing away 57 the defilement of darkness.
Vines, like young ladies with
Beautiful braided hair of leaves
Large flower-like breasts and thin waists,
Appeared as though they wanted to bathe in this
precious lake.
Seeing this, desire arose in the flowers
Making their faces as red as evening clouds.
It was as though they stretched out their arms and
Dressed themselves up in clothes of green leaves.
The reflection of the moon 57 appeared on the pure lake, and
Flocks of geese, which were as white as water lilies,
Confused the reflection with their lovers
And went back and forth crying out.
This clear mirror-like lake,
Which was as bright as sapphires and
Had many amazing, brilliant reflections,
Could be seen on the waist of the lotus forest.»
570 ཀུ་ཤ་ is a special grass used for sprinkling water in purification (ཁྲུས་གསོལ་)
ceremonies. It is also sometimes used in burnt offerings. Te is a transliteration of
the Sanskrit ‘kusha'.
$71 šat' is literally the colour blue, but Tibetans refer to the colour green as blue.
$72 agt' in this context is a reference to the purification ceremony known as a
ཁྲུས་གསོལ་
373 555 literally .hare possessing one', being an epithet for the moon,
574 Wa a r is a transliteration of the Sanskrit word 'Indranlla’, being the gem
sapphire."
575 ནགས་ཀྱི་པད་མོ་ is a reference to beautiful women who have mirrors tied to their
waists.
139



voy The Six Brothers: Chapter Seven ser
Beside the edge of SPARKLING COOLNESS, there was a tree with huge
leaves and branches. At the foot of the tree was a rock made of water
crystal gems which the great Bodhisattva PURE WISDOM sat down on.
His disciples who had gathered there, prostrated before him. At that
time, PURE WISDOM clearly realised the consciousness, 576 senses, 577
thoughts, latent tendencies and inherent nature of his highly
knowledgeable disciples and so he knew that the time of their training
had arrived. For the purpose of urging the brothers to completely
arise from their sleep of ignorance, with a voice like Brahma, he
spoke to them thus: “Children!
Tell me who of you has increased their inherent
pure consciousness 578through
The essence of the spiritual instructions -
which can soak people's minds
With the water of concentration, plant the seeds of virtue,
grow well the shoots of enlightenment,
And by the legs of diligence lead to the path of liberation."
The brothers prostrated before him and DARKNESS answered,
“Even though I have entered into meditative concentration
day and night,
And thoroughly analysed everything with the eyes of
discernment,
The clouds of permanence and annihilation have
completely obscured me,
So I can not see at all the perfect sky of truth."
Web
576 www in this context refers to win - from the Sanskrit ‘ayatana' meaning
*sensory field' or ‘sources of consciousness'
37 དབང་པོ་ in this context refers to more than just the five senses or faculties but
rather the powers of the five senses.
S* ཡེ་ཤེས་ཁམས་ is a problemiatic term to accurately translate into English, （དེ་ཤེས་ is
typically translated as 'wisdom' though this falls short of the greater meaning. Other
expressions such as 'innáte wisdom', 'exalted wisdom', primal awareness' or
“pristine awareness', while adding to the understanding of this term also fail to
adequately communicate the precise meaning.
5790125
R
140
ASHIRE



Vo The Six Brothers: Chapter Seven ber
VIOLENCE answered,
"I think that even though, like an elephant trainer,
I have tried earnestly
With the hook of concentration, to control my mind,
My elephant-like mind, which still goes to the precipe
of affliction,
Destroys my hopes like an elephant destroying a mud pool.”
SON OF DESIRE answered,
"Even though I have entered the boat of asceticism
and crossed the ocean of desire
Still, I have not reached the island of liberation, which is
The origin of precious higher perceptions, magical powers
and precious consciousness.
So my efforts have all been in vain."
VIRTUOUS answered,
“My eyes follow your water lily-like red toe nails
and like bees to a water lily so my hope is in you.
The chariot of my mind is tied to the mountain of your
unimaginable qualities,
And I have obtained the supreme concentration
that can not be moved by the winds of false doctrines,
So there is nothing else I need to strive after."
LOVING KINDNESS answered,
“The firewood of affliction is fuelled by the various winds
of karma
And lights the fire 580 of suffering which burns all migrators.
I desire nothing else but to completely save those migrators
And always earnestly do so, drinking nothing but the
nectar of indefatigability."
580 54355is a metaphor for fire.
141



Boy The Six Brothers: Chapter Seven yer
GREAT UNDERSTANDING answered,
“The nectar of your kindness has increased the virtue of
our bodies, has purified our eyes of ...
retention, concentration and higher perceptions,
And has strengthened the limbs of our magical powers,
which have many kinds of wonderful qualities.
Now, by the sunlight of your blessing open the lotus of our
hearts, and
Overcoming the darkness of our ignorance, reveal to us
the treasury of understanding of the exalted consciousness
of reality,” which is perfectly pure from the beginning."
I NIONER
Then, the great exalted Bodhisattva PURE WISDOM taught them in
poetic verse the true nature of the enumerations of the dharma. ***
DANAUD
"That which is called 'samsara'
arises from those who do not know
The inherent essence of all phenomenon,
which exists from the beginning.
Those who perfectly comprehend this true nature
will be liberated. 584
So you must thoroughly understand this.
Space can not be seen or held,
Has no centre or edge, no origin or end,
Is not a material substance, but is also not
completely non-matter, and
581 435 in this context is best read as 07351
582 nggawe is one of the five waarin -- which are: 1. avatar sawa
*mirror-like' consciousness/wisdom, 2. wgaragwe 'equality'
consciousness/wisdom, 3. Wer discriminating' consciousness/wisdom,
4.579'w an accomplishing' consciousness/wisdom, 5. Fara wan
*reality consciousness/wisdom.
583 ཆོས་ཀྱི་རྣམ་གྲངས་
384 g arage literally means 'to pass from misery' and is a euphemism for 'death'.
g ang is also an expression referring to entering into nirvana, but in this context
it is best understood as a reference to being liberated from cyclical existence.
142



voor The Six Brothers: Chapter Seven zoer
It also has no inherent need to provide a locations for
all things.
Likewise, from the beginning, all phenomena has no origin
or cessation,
Does not dwell anywhere, is separated from the end of
permanence and annihilation,
Is non-appearing and not empty - and not both of these,
and not something else. 586
Individual phenomenon 587and reality stare inseparable --
being emptiness itself.589
Even though pure space can suddenly be completely covered
With thick clouds, appearing in various shapes and colours,
The clouds are not stuck to space and yet.
Space and clouds are not completely separate,
Likewise, in the pure mind there is no inherent
Ignorance, karma, affliction and sufferings, but suddenly
These things appear, yet they do not exist as one sees them.
So this reality and unchanging emptiness are inseparable.
When clouds have gone, various reflections of the sun,
Moon and stars shine clearly in the pure sky.
The reflections dwell in the sky and not elsewhere,
And their endless light is inseparable from the sky.
Likewise, when defilements have gone,
The various and infinite deeds of inherent pure wisdom.”
588 TNDN gast in this context means 'to give or provide a place or location'.
586 This fine refers to the agona, the four ends/borders of mistaken reality. The
four ends are: 1. 01 ARQ' 'existence', 2.55'van ‘non-existence',
3. གཉིས་ཀའི་མཐའ་ “both of these, 4. གཉིས་མིན་གྱི་མཐའ་ neither of these.
587 ÉVES
588 avas
589 དེ་བཞིན་ཉིད་ refers to སྟོང་པ་ཉིད་ temptiness in this context.
59@ ཆོས་དབྱིངས་ refers to སྟོང་པ་ཉིད་ temptiness in this context.
591 དབྱིངས་སུ་ཡེ་ཤེས་འཕྲིན་ལས་སྣ་ཚོགས་ refers to the deeds and wisdom of the Buddha
143



bago The Six Brothers: Chapter Seven yer
Which are dependent upon the power of previous prayers
and sentient beings,
Appear inseparably with emptiness. 592
When a house - which has accumulated darkness for
thousands of years-
Is destroyed, light instantly shines around.
Even though darkness has not gone elsewhere and light
has not been generated
What is seen is that darkness has gone and light has
been generated.
Likewise, when the obstruction of ignorance is overcome,
All the delusions of samsara will pass and pure
consciousness will shine brightly.
Even though delusions have not ceased and pure
consciousness has not been attained
This convention is still called 'samsara' and 'nirvana'.
They who mistake a grass rope for a poisonous snake
Become frightened, and so are worn out running away.
Coming back and realising that it is just a rope,
they are released from their fear.
Later on, the snake does not become a rope.
Likewise, those who see their mind as an affliction of
wrong perceptions,
Even by diligently abandoning these, will not be liberated.
But by understanding the inherent characteristics of their
mind, they will be completely liberated.
Previously impure minds, in time to come, do not become
pure.
Thirsty people who want to drink water,
And so follows after a mirage, only increase their craving.
Those who know that this can not be drunk
592 ཆོས་ཀྱི་དབྱིངས་ refers to སྟོང་པ་ཉིད་ temptiness in this context.
144



by The Six Brothers; Chapter Seven ser
.
Remain where they are, not striving after it.
Likewise, whoever desires to obtain liberation or nirvana
Will only always increase in craving and
Will not attain it and also not gain full realisation 59 -
The understanding of this is ‘nirvana'.
Though we really experience many dreams of both
pleasure and pain,
Upon waking we realise they are not real.
The Exalted Ones 594 know perfectly that the many
appearances of worldly delusions
Though they are seen, are not real.
Knowing that their magical objects are not real,
Expert magicians freely perform many illusions.
By their higher wisdom ”the Exalted Ones
Reveal infinite miraculous manifestations of the
inseparability of the two truths.596
Upon entering the ocean,
The many kinds of rivers on the earth become
inseparably one.
The realisation that faith, compassion and countless qualities
Are all inseparably one in emptiness,"liberates one
from samsara.
593 všautišat or ‘manifest realisation'.
594 game is a reference to those who have reached aštriar 'the seeing path',
the third of the five paths to liberation. The five progressive paths to liberation (also
called the five paths to Buddhahood) are: 1. ***** the path of accumulation,
2. W the path of preparation, 3. Jóna the path of perceiving, 4. Narava
the path of meditation, 5. No the path of no more learning.
59° གནས་གཞན་གྱུར་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས་ in this context refers to a wisdom that is higher than that
of ordinary beings.
5* བདེན་གཉིས་ is an abbreviation of བདེན་པ་གཉིས་. The two truths are:
1.73999 'obscured' or relative truth', 2. Fagaraget 'ultimate' or
absolute' truth.
59 དབྱིངས་ refers to སྟོང་པ་ཉིད་ temptiness* in this context.
145



The Six Brothers: Chapter Seven ser
In all this, there is no self,598 no life, no identity of persons,
No agent, and no binding and releasing,
No cause and no effect, so
The interdependent connections of the causal conditions
Of the emptiness of 'samsara' and 'nirvana' are only a
minor designation.
Therefore, where is discrimination, cessation and
attainment?
Original purity is the inherent characteristic of space -
You must understand that all phenomena are like this!”
After being taught these enumerations of the dharma, the brothers
attained knowledge of the dharma and subsequent knowledge in their
understanding of the four noble truths." Through the attainment of
the sublime, pure, surgical spoon-like consciousness, they were
completely freed from the cataract-like doctrine of self in phenomena
and self in persons. Thus their knowledge of the dharma and
subsequent cognition became perfectly clear, having had their blurred
vision removed. Since they now saw all phenomena with the eye of
the dharma, which is free from defilement and perfectly pure, they
manifestly attained the Extremely Joyous exalted stage which is
completely liberated from cyclical existence.
598 950785 selflessness' or 'lack of self". There are the two kinds of lack of self or
identity. They are 1.495397655978 the lack of self in persons, 2. EVO
gaya the lack of self in dharma/phenomena.
5994595 Fakt is a reference to 5599 or Qurangere the four
noble truths. These are: 1. Syaabast the truth of suffering,
2. ཀུན་འབྱུང་བདེན་པ་ the truth of origin/source, 3. འགོག་པའི་བདེན་པ་ the truth of
cessation, 4. 9995 the truth of the path.
600 19955010'' is the first stage or level of the ten stages of the Bodhisattva :
Though not having left the physical world, one who has reached this stage is said to
have been liberated from samsara. This first stage is in fact the wžana 'seeing
path', the third of the five progressive paths to Buddhahood. There are ten levels or
stages through which a Bodhisattva passes through on the journey to Buddhahood.
The ten stages (or “grounds”) 55 ga magaaa'ng' of a Bodhisattva are:
1.རབ་ཏུ་དགའ་བ་ *Extremely Joyous, 2.དྲི་མ་མེད་པ་ “Stainless', 3. འོད་བྱེད་པ་ tLight-
Giving', 4.35RŠOT Radiant', 5.35579 "Difficult to Overcome',
146



boo The Six Brothers: Chapter Seven your
They obtained the precious teaching, i
Which gave birth to many wonderful things.
They were released from all the suffering of samsara
And were perfectly filled with complete bliss.
Like a poor person finding treasure
Which was always in their house with them, ..
So the brothers, by the eye of the lama's blessing,
Saw their own pure consciousnesses, which always existed.
Having had the door of liberation completely opened,
The staircase descending to the lower realms disintegrated.
The water flow of the sorrow of suffering was cut,
And the ocean of tears dried up.
It was as though they had been wiped pure 60% with a cloth,
Were resting after crossing over a cesspool, :
Were revived after receiving sustenance, and. .
Were fully satisfied after being given nectar.
They attained clarity that was clearer than crystal,603
Qualities that were more precious than gems,
Happiness that was greater than that provided by
the wish-fulfilling tree, 004
Purity that was purer than space.
Their incredible joy from crossing that which was
difficult to cross,
And finding that which was difficult to find,
6. a 95971 Manifest, 7. 255 75T 'Gone Afar, 8. dan Immovable',
9. Papavaš "Good Intelligence”, 10. Dhq Cloud of Dharma'. '
SIRET in this context refers to samsara or worldly existence.
602 zalga literally 'free of dusť. This expression is also a metaphorical reference to
AV emancipation' or 'liberation' and W54HY 'Enlightened One'.
603 ཤེས་ in this context is best read as ཤེལ་
604
5
' is a type of white sandalwood tree, but also is a reference to Bar
as the wish-fulfilling tree of the divine realm.
147



W
wwerhewhew
WWWWWWWMWWLW... WWWLLLLLLLLLL
Broot The Six Brothers: Chapter Seven roer
Was so great that not all the happiness of the world
Could compete with even a fraction of it.
Like the rays of the moon,
Their fame shone everywhere,
And with crowns of hands in praying positions
The creatures of the world, including the gods,
prostrated to them.
A rain of jewels and incense, and garlands of flowers
Fell from the sky.
The drums of the gods
Proclaimed forth everywhere their amazing achievement.
Seeing this, the ocean, as if clothed
With waves of bristling hairs of joy
And the beautiful belt of the seven mountains, 60s
Moved about as if desiring the dancing in the sky.
The lakes of enjoyment, with basins made of
the four jewels, 607
Were completely stirred up
Causing the earth surrounding the golden navel of
Mount Meru
To tremble for awhile.
60595 There are seven golden mountains which surround Mt. Meru. They are:
1. gr Circumference Holder', 2. F255' 'Perfect Bow', 3.5
*Horse Ear', 4.995 'Lovely Looking”, 5.255587 Possessing Acacia Trees',
6. གཤོལ་མདའ་འཛིན་ Piough Holder', 7. གཉའ་ཤིང་འཛིན་ «Yoke Holder. Other
traditions list the seven mountains as: 1.85 'Blue Light“, 2. 055 Mandara',
3. ནི་ཥ་ཊ་ “Nishata'. 4. ནོར་བུའི་འོད་ Jewel Light, 5. དྲོ་ཎ་ (Drona', 6, གངས་རི་ (Snow
Mountain', 7. ERR Vajra Mountain'.
606 AM There are seven 'leisure' or 'amusement lakes. They are: 1. Pametne the
salt lake, 2. ཆང་གི་མཚོ་ the beer lake, 3. ཆུའི་མཚོ་ the water lake, 4. འོ་མའི་མཚོ་ the
milk lake, 5. a avut in the yoghurt lake, 6. Ak the butter lake, 7. Fan
the honey lake.
607 Aquira The four jewels are: 1.9747 gold, 2.554% silver, 3. 5
sapphire, 4.6157ruby.
148



by The Six Brothers. Chapter Seven mer
The cymbals decorating the gods' palaces
Played music, and Mount Meru danced.
Immortal Indra 60% made offerings to them
As if wanting to create a lake of nectar.
Like the foundation of karma
With its various patterns of virtue and evil, and
Like the differences between the pleasure and pain of
all beings,
So the earth oscillated high and low.
As if they were king geese,
The brothers flew around Pure Wisdom many times.
Flying up to the height of seven palm trees, and then,
bowing down
They zealously, joyfully and beautifully praised him:
"You instantly steal away the perpetually habituated
delusions 60% of migrators and
Give a great new nectar of joy- the happiness of which
has never been experienced.
You immediately shame the unassailable deeds of the four
demons, ººcompletely overcoming them.
You free destitute beings from suffering and place them
in the great kingdom of the unsurpassed dharma.
608 Qatagga57
60 ཡུན་རིང་ in this context refers to defusions that have been habituated over many
thousands of rebirths and does not simply mean 'a long time'.
610255 Day' is a reference to the deeds of the four demons, *maras', 'negative or
evil forces'. The four, which keep migrators from being freed from cyclical
existence, are: 1. q ersaa55" the mara of affliction,
2.65 12955" the mara of the aggregates - these are the conglomeration of the
physical and mental components of a being, (The five aggregates, 55 ' are:
1. གཟུགས་ form, 2. ཚོར་བ་ feeling, 3. འདུ་ཤེས་ discrimination, 4. འདུ་བྱེད་
compositional factors, 5. རྣམ་ཤེས་ consciousness.) 3. འཆི་བདག་གི་བདུད་ the mara of
the Lord of Death, 4. pasa 455" the mara of the son of gods/sensuality.
149



boo The Six Brothers: Chapter Seven zor
Though you are not the sun, you alone shine upon migrators;
and though you are not the moon,
You radiate the white light of joy for all beings everywhere;
and though you are not an elephant decorated with
bee earrings,
You destroy the cesspool of affliction; and though you are
not a lion with a flowing mane like a creeping vine,
You frighten away the beasts of wrong beliefs.
In the same way the earth can bear the great burden of
all creatures,
And the pure Ganges ? continually flows without resting,
and the clouds rain often but do not tire,
And the wish-fulfilling tree gives to people whatever they
want, but does not hope to be repaid,
You always enjoy helping others and never tire in doing so.
Since you have vast understanding, broad wings of
knowledge and scholars respectfully follow you,
You are like the sky, or the king of the birds, 613
or a jewelled crown.
Since you never have the chance to do wrong, are not moved
by the wind of distraction and are not controlled by the
King of the Nagas,
You are not completely like the ocean, but are the faultless
one of all excellent qualities.
Your far-seeing, blue lotus-like eyes are a guide to those
blind to the mind's eye.
611 managuasaararat" literally 'the possessor of the hare image and
cool rays', being an epithet of the moon.
612 65' is also spelled 457 and 5' and is one of the four rivers which has its source
in Mt. Kailash. These four rivers, referred to as the a'29's the four descending
rivers, are: 1.45*** the Ganges, 2. avg" the Sindhu , 3. krs the Pakshu, 4. the
Sita.
643 daga59857
150



von The Six Brothers: Chapter Seven ger
Your beautiful face is like a blooming lotus, your two hands
completely save those who are afflicted with pain,
and your cool shade makes you like the wish-fulfilling tree.
The reservoir of your mind is deep like an ocean, being a
treasury of nectar to those who are lacking in the dharma.
Your red toe nails, which are like the early morning sun,
have become the crowns of all beings, including Indra.“
Since you are free from all attachment,
you love the destitute like an only child.
Having crossed over the mud of cyclical existence,
you really enjoy helping others in the ocean of samsara.
Having abandoned the craving of your own happiness,
you have taken on all the sufferings of sentient beings.
We, who have tried to tell of your excellent qualities,
will never be able to understand your infinite knowledge.”
With much joy the brothers made offerings and praised him -
the holy, spiritual guide for all.
Through many means, they tirelessly established others
in the happiness of the world and the bliss of liberation.
So in this way, their minds became replete with the infinite
treasure of their merit.
And likewise, their profound wisdom perfectly increased like
the waxing moon.is
Having gained mastery over their sublime, infinite
consciousnesses, their bodies could transform into
millions of emanations and even in one moment
they could go to the countless Buddha fields.076
614 5975 I V is a not a reference to Indra's cohorts, but rather a reference to all
great gods of the world.
his
w a ag is the period of time during the 1st to the 15th day of the month
according to a lunar calendar. During this time, the size of the moon appears bigger
each day until it becomes a full moon on the 15th day. This period of time is also
known as དཀར་ཕྱོགས་ and ཕྱོགས་སྔ་མ་ The period of the waning moon is known as
མར་ངོ་
151



von The Six Brothers: Chapter Seven ze
They offered many offerings as great as the clouds
and ocean to the Buddhas, and the brothers fully accepted
the ocean of excellent words of the Buddhas and freely
entered the door of the immeasurable dharma.
The brothers made those in the higher realms renounce
desire and pacified the suffering of those in
lower realms, and in accordance to each one's merit
led them to the paths of the three vehicles.617
Having acted zealously like this, they obtained all the
qualities of the six transcendental perfections and
gradually they purified themselves from all defilement and
being complete in merit and wisdom 18they attained
supreme enlightenment.619
So these images of those perfect moons of merit 620have been
drawn well by the brush of my imagination and by the ink
of my wisdom, which have been soaked in the virtue of
previous rebirths.
This story has been written as an elixir of great joy for all
people,
And as long as the sun shines and the earth wears the ocean
as clothes, 621
Ceun
616 Fanagala literally the realms of the ten directions', but in this context refers
to the endless Buddha realms or 'fields' and is not confined to just the number 'ten'.
617 24 " the three vehicles. These are: 1.2415Vq5 low vehicle or Hinayana,
2. ཐེག་པ་ཆེན་པོ་ Great vehicle or Mahayana, 3. རྡོ་རྗེ་ཐེག་པ་ tantric vehicle or
Vajrayana. (Also 1. ཉན་ཐོས་ཀྱི་ཐེག་པ་ the hearer's vehicle. 2. རང་རྒྱལ་གྱི་ཐེག་པ་ the
solitary learning vehicle, 3. བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་དཔའི་ཐེག་པ་ the Bodhisattva vehicle.)
618 B o a literally 'the two accumulations'. It is necessary to be replete in these
before entering Buddhahood. The two are:1. 2015g B y the accumulation
of merit, 2.WAND V' the accumulation of wisdom/ pure consciousness or
insight
619 བླ་ན་མེད་པའི་བྱང་ཆུབ་མངོན་དུ་གྱུར་ refers to the brothers attaining Buddhahod.
620 བསོད་ནམས་ཡོངས་རྫོགས་ཟླ་བ་དག་ is a poetic reference to the six brothers.
621 ནོར་འཛིན་གཞི་ནི་ཆུ་གཏེར་གཡོ་བའི་གོས་ is a way of describing the earth*s relationship
to the sea. One of the poetic titles given to the earth is Hava TNST the one with
clothes of the ocean'.
152



1
The Six Brothers: Chapter Seven ze
And until the time that the great wind at the end of the age
destroys this world, may the holy conduct in this story
be practiced by all!
imensionamento
d
se vidi
ora
May the clouds send down rain at the right time,
tirelessly providing good harvests.
May all the deeds of the impudent and dishonest completely
cease, and may all beings always have the dharma present
in their lives.
May the poor, having had their suffering overcome,
be given whatever they desire, and may all sentient beings
respectfully worship the wish-fulfilling gem 22 of the
Buddha's teachings.
May both the animate and inanimate worlds 623 always be
full of virtue!
Wisdom is a sun which has a blazing sphere of pure
consciousness and rays of realisation that destroy the
darkness of ignorance.
In the vast knowable sky, wisdom's beautiful sharp rays
of discernment melt the snow mountains of wrong
understanding and
Nurture well the lotus garden of all beings, always
illuminating this world.
So wisdom, which is the guide for all people,
is deserving of praise from thousands 24 of tongues.
62 དབང་གི་རྒྱལ་པོ་ is synonymous with ཡིད་བཞིན་ནོར་བུ་ - which is a translation of the
Sanskrit term 'chintamani'. In accordance with Indian tradition, this was a precious
stone believed to be capable of fulfilling one's wishes.
623 Abg QREATÈT literally “immoveable' and 'moveable”.
624 gram is literally 'one hundred tongues' but is a reference to 'many'.
153



WWW
W WWWWWWWWWWWW
WW
!.
...
.
..
..
..
Ugo The Six Brothers: Chapter Seven your
In conclusion, I give praise to the supreme wisdom which can,
through the sunlight of pure consciousness, completely destroy the
affliction of darkness in this world. And I give praise to the perfect
spiritual guides, from whom all the qualities of the transcendental
perfections will be attained if one respectfully follows them. I will
also say that the holy dharma is a saviour to all beings, a friend and
protector, and an island of refuge.628
This is chapter seven.
625 915 is literally 'island/continent' but in this context is a reference to the dharma
being an island of sanctuary or refuge.
154



COLOPHON
The spiritual guide, Shepai Dorje, has given very high praise to this
story, claiming it is a translation of an Indian text. Shepai Dorje also
notes that the story contains thirty five different poetic devices. At the
end of another book containing this same text, the name of another
person called “Umapati' appears. Perhaps he is the same Pandita
Umapati mentioned in the scripture called Thubten Chidor written by
Kedrup Rinpoche and was the Indian scholar who was invited to
Ngari by Khamba Gedun Sanbo. It is possible that he is the author of
this story which contains such wonderful words and an excellent
meaning. In the region of U-Tsang this is a very rare and extra-
ordinary treatise of poetics. Therefore, please look after it very
carefully.
[It is not known who has written the above colophon, but it is not the
author or translator of the story. It has been written quite sometime
after the original story was written. This colophon appears to be
somewhat unusual as not only is it unknown who wrote it, it is also
unknown who Shepai Dorje is and why he is mentioned.]
.
In current manuscripts the colophon also contains a brief explanation
from Shepai Dorje about how he taught this story to a particular
student at the request of a leader. Shepai Dorje mentions how he
taught other poetry texts to this particular student. He praises the
story of The Six Brothers, saying that there are one hundred and
twenty two poetic devices contained within it. Shepai Dorje also
gives a blessing to his student hoping that he will become an expert in
poetry.
155



：༣
༤
.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
དཔྱད་གཞིའི་ཡིག་ཆ་ཁག
IN TIBETAN
གཞོན་ནུ་དྲུག་གི་རྟོགས་བརྗོད་གསར་འགྲེལ།
(A New Commentary on The Six Brothers)
Tsewang (ཚེ་དབང་) Beijing: མི་རིགས་དཔེ་སྐྲུན་ཁང་། 2002.
མངོན་པ་མཛོད་རྩ་འགྲེལ།
(Text and Commentary of the Treasure of Abhidharma)
Jamyang Loder Wangbo (འཇམ་དབྱངས་བློ་གཏེར་དབང་པོ།)
Chengdu: སི་ཁྲོན་མི་རིགས་དཔེ་སྐྲུན་ཁང་། 1996.
བུ་སྟོན་ཆོས་འབྱུང་།
(Buton's History of the Dharma)
Buton Rinchen Drub (བུ་སྟོན་རིན་ཆེན་གྲུབ།)
Beijing: ཀྲུང་གོའི་བོད་ཀྱི་ཤེས་རིག་དཔེ་སྐྲུན་ཁང་། 1988.
མངོན་རྟོགས་རྒྱན་གྱི་འགྲེལ་པ་སྦས་དོན་རབ་གསལ།
(Commentary on the Ornament of Realisation)
Kowo Rabjam Sonam Senge (གོ་བོ་རབ་འབྱམས་བསོད་ནམས་སེང་གེ།)
རྫོང་གསར་བཤད་གྲྭའི་ནང་འགྲེམས་སློབ་གཞི། །
བྱང་ཆུབ་ལམ་རིམ་ཆེ་བ།
(The Stages of the Great Path of the Bodhisattva)
Tsong Kapa (རྗེ་ཙོང་ཁ་པ།) Qinghai: མཚོ་སྔོན་མི་རིགས་དཔེ་སྐྲུན་ཁང་།
1985.
157



མི་
:
1:;
,
s:
'' sr:
Uss
!!
!
",
"
"
41
-
443
1
:1L.
གྲུབ་མཐའ་ཀུན་ཤེས་རྩ་འགྲེལ།
(The Text and Commentary of the Tenets of All-Knowing)
Lotsawa Daktshe (སྟག་ཚང་ལོ་ཙཱ་བ།) Beijing: མི་རིགས་དཔེ་སྐྲུན་ཁང་།
གྲུབ་མཐའ་རིན་ཆེན་ཕྲེང་བ།།
(The Tenets of the Garland)
Jigme Wangbo (རྗེ་དཀོན་མཆོག་འཇིགས་མེད་དབང་པོ།)
Lhasa: ཀན་སུའུ་མི་རིགས་དཔེ་སྐྲུན་ཁང་།
སྙན་ངག་མེ་ལོང་མའི་འགྲེལ་པ་དཎྜིའི་དགོངས་རྒྱན། །
(Commentary on the Poetry Mirror:)
Master Mipam Geleg Namgyal
(བོད་མཁས་པ་མི་ཕམ་དགེ་ལེགས་རྣམ་རྒྱལ། )
Beijing: ཀྲུང་གོའི་བོད་རིག་པ་དཔེ་སྐྲུན་ཁང་།
དུང་དཀར་ཚིག་མཛོད་ཆེན་མོ།
(Tungkar's Great Dictionary)
Tungkar Losang Trinley (དུང་དཀར་བློ་བཟང་འཕྲིན་ལས་)
Beijing: ཀྲུང་གོའི་བོད་རིག་པ་དཔེ་སྐྲུན་ཁང་། 2002.
དགེ་བཤེས་ཆོས་ཀྱི་གྲགས་པས་བརྩམས་པའི་བརྡ་དག་མིང་ཚིག་གསལ་བ་བཞུགས་སོ།
(Geshe Churdrak's Dictionary)
Beijing: མི་རིགས་དཔེ་སྐྲུན་ཁང་། 1981.
བོད་རྒྱ་ཚིག་མཛོད་ཆེན་མོ།
(The Great Tibetan-Chinese Dictionary)
1985. 3 vols. [2 vol. ed.: Minzu chubanshe, 1993]
Beijing: མི་རིགས་དཔེ་སྐྲུན་ཁང་།
158



དག་ཡིག་གསར་བསྒྲིགས།
(The New Order Spelling Dictionary)
1979 [3rd edition]
Chief editor: Samden (བསམ་གཏན།)
Qinghai: མཚོ་སྔོན་མི་རིགས་དཔེ་སྐྲུན་ཁང་།
མངོན་བརྗོད་རྒྱུ་མཚོའི་ཆུ་ཐིགས་ཀྱི་རྩ་འགྲེལ།
(The Text and Commentary of the Ocean of Synonomics)
1992. eds. Norbu Dradu and Tsering Namgyal.
(ནོར་བུ་དགྲ་འདུལ་དང་ཚེ་རིང་རྣམ་རྒྱལ།）
Lhasa: བོད་ལྗོངས་མི་དམངས་དཔེ་སྐྲུན་ཁང་།
བོད་ཀྱི་བརྡ་སྤྲོད་རིག་པའི་ཁྲིད་རྒྱུན་རབ་གསལ་མེ་ལོང་།
(The Clear Mirror of Tibetan Grammar)
1981. Kesang Gyurme (སྐལ་བཟང་འགྱུར་མེད།)
Chengdu: སི་ཁྲོན་མི་རིགས་དཔེ་སྐྲུན་ཁང་།
བོད་རྒྱ་ཤན་སྦྱར་གྱི་ལྷ་སའི་ཁ་སྐད་ཚིག་མཛོད།
(Tibetan-Chinese Lhasa Colloquial Dictionary)
1980. Beijing: མི་རིགས་དཔེ་སྐྲུན་ཁང་།
བོད་ཡིག་གི་རྨང་གཞིའི་ཤེས་བྱ།
(Foundational Knowledge of Tibetan)
Chonpel Dorje (ཆོས་འཕེལ་རྡོ་རྗེ།)
1981. Lhasa: བོད་ལྗོངས་མི་དམངས་དཔེ་སྐྲུན་ཁང་།
དབྱིན་བོད་རྒྱ་གསུམ་ཤན་སྦྱར་གྱི་ཚིག་མཛོད། །
(English-Tibetan-Chinese Dictionary)
1997 [3rd edition]. ed. Tashi Tshering (བཀྲ་ཤིས་ཚེ་རིང་།)
Beijing: མི་རིགས་དཔེ་སྐྲུན་ཁང་།
159



• :: '''
r
:
:su
Ass! Witz•
ཉི
ན་ནི
1
L
.10.
1
111.
སྐྱེད་མའི་བཀའ་དྲིན།
(Mother's Kindness)
1995. Tsedor ཚེ་རྡོར།)
Lhasa: བོད་ལྗོངས་མི་དམངས་དཔེ་སྐྲུན་ཁང་།
གཞོན་ནུ་དྲུག་གི་རྟོགས་བརྗོད།
(The Six Brothers)
1980.
Lhasa: བོད་ལྗོངས་མི་དམངས་དཔེ་སྐྲུན་ཁང་།
སྙན་ངག་བྱིས་པ་འཇུག་སྒོ།
(An Introduction to Poetics)
1990.Rebgon Dorjekhar (རེབ་གོང་རྡོ་རྗེ་མཁར།)
Lhasa: བོད་ལྗོངས་མི་དམངས་དཔེ་སྐྲུན་ཁང་།
སྙན་ངག་རོགས་ཁྲིད།
(A Guide to Poetics)
Tsering Pelgye (ཚེ་རིང་དཔལ་རྒྱུས།)
Lhasa: བོད་ལྗོངས་མི་དམངས་དཔེ་སྐྲུན་ཁང་།
i60



..
.
IN ENGLISH
Das, Sarat Chandra. 1992 [1902]. Tibetan-English Dictionary.
Delhi: Book Faith India.
Duff, Tony. 2003. The Illuminator Tibetan-English Encyclopaedic
Dictionary. Kathmandu: Padma Karpo Translation
Committee, The Tibetan Computer Company.
Goldstein, Melvyn C., ed., T. N. Shelling and J. T. Surkhang, assoc.
eds., with Pierre Robillard. 2001. The New Tibetan-English
Dictionary of Modern Tibetan. Berkeley: University of
California Press.
Goldstein, Melvyn C. with Gelek Rimpoche and Lobsang Phuntshog.
1991. Essentials of Modern Literary Tibetan: A Reading
Course and Reference Grammar. Berkeley: University of
California Press.
Preston, Craig. 2003. How to Read Classical Tibetan. Ithaca, New
York: Snow Lion Publications.
Tsepak, Rigzin. 1993. Tibetan-English Dictionary of Buddhist
Terminology. Library of
Tibetan Works and Archives.
(ནང་དོན་རིག་པའི་མིང་ཚིག་བོད་དབྱིན་ཤན་སྦྱར།)
Wilson, Joe B. 1992. Translating Buddhism from Tibetan. Ithaca,
New York: Snow Lion Publications.
161



བརྗོད་པ་བཞུགས་སོ། །
མཛད་པའི་གཞོན་ནུ་དྲུག་གི་རྟོགས་པ་
འཕགས་ཡུལ་གྱི་སྙན་ངག་མཁན་རྒྱལ་བ་སྡེས་
རྨ
༌
བྱ་མྨཊིར་ཀ︽d%agifieren ; མ
ཙི ཝིདྷཾ8:
རཱཧ4:



ਸਕਸ ਸਾਲ
ਇਕ ਇਕ



དཀར་ཆག
འགོ་བརྗོད།
རབ་བྱེད་དང་པོ་གཞོན་ནུ་དྲུག་གི་ཁྱད་ཆོས་བརྗོད་པ།
རབ་བྱེད་གཉིས་པ་སྦྱིན་པའི་ཕན་ཡོན་ལ་བསྔགས་པ།
རབ་བྱེད་གསུམ་པ་ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས་ཀྱི་ཡོན་ཏན་ལ་
བསྔགས་པ། ..……....
རབ་བྱེད་བཞི་པ་སྙིང་རྗེ་དང་འབྲེལ་བའི་བཟོད་པ་
ལ་བསྔགས་པ། .....
རབ་བྱེད་ལྔ་པ་སྐྱེས་ཆེན་གྱི་བརྩོན་འགྲུས་ལ་བསྔགས་
པ། ......
རབ་བྱེད་དྲུག་པ་ཡོན་ཏན་ཐམས་ཅད་བསྐྱེད་པའི་
བསམ་གཏན་ལ་བསྔགས་པ།…….……………….…
རབ་བྱེད་བདུན་པ་དགེ་བའི་བཤེས་གཉེན་གྱི་ཆེ་བ་
བརྗོད་ནས་ཤེས་རབ་ཀྱི་བསླབ་པ་ལ་བསྔགས་པ།
E
བ བ བ• • (69)
མཛད་བྱང་



， " " ，，" .
" ་་
་་་་
་
འགོ་བརྗོད།
རྒྱ་གར་སྐད་དུ། ཥཊུ་མཱ་རཱ་ཨ་བཱ་དྷཱ་ན། བོད་སྐད་དུ། གཞོན་ནུ་དྲུག་གི་
རྟོགས་པ་བརྗོད་པ། ཐམས་ཅད་མཁྱེན་པ་ལ་ཕྱག་འཚལ་ལོ། །
གང་ཞིག་སེར་སྐྱར་འཁོར་ལོས་བསྒྱུར་བའི་རིགས་འཁྲུངས་གླིང་བཞིའི་རྒྱལ་
སྲིད་རྩྭ་བཞིན་དོར་ནས་དཀའ་ཐུབ་སྤྱད། ། ཤིང་ མཆོག་ དྲུང་ དུ་ གཅིག་པུས་
བདུད་དཔུང་ ཀུན་ བཅོམ་ རྙེད་ དཀའི་ བྱང་ ཆུབ་ བླ་ མེད་ དམ་ པའི་ བདུད་ རྩི་
བརྙེས། །འགྲོ་འདི་ཐེག་གསུམ་ལམ་ལ་རབ་དྲངས་ཉིད་མཚུངས་འགོད་ཕྱིར་ལྟ་
ངན་ཀུན་གསལ་འཁོར་ལོ་རྒྱུ་ཆེན་བསྐོར། ། མཛད་པ་མཐའ་དག་རྫོགས་སླད་སཱ་
ལའི་ཚལ་དུ་ཞི་བར་རབ་ཞུགས་རྒྱལ་བའི་དབང་པོས་ཁྱེད་ལ་སྲུངས། ། གང་གི་རྣ་
བར་བདུད་རྩིའི་ཟེགས་ མ་ སྤྲོ་ བྱེད་ མཛེས་ སྡུག་ རི་ མོས་ མིག་ ནི་ ཀུན་ དགའ་
བསྐྱེད། །གང་ཞིག་ཀློག་པའི་ལྕེ་ཡང་སྐལ་བཟང་ལྡན་གྱུར་དོན་སྤྱོད་ཡིད་ལ་རེ་
བའི་འབྲས་བུ་སྟེར། ། ཤེས་ལྡན་བློ་ཡི་བང་མཛོད་རབ་ཏུ་རྒྱས་བྱེད་མི་ཤེས་སྐྱེ་བོའི་
རྨོངས་པ་འཕྲོག་བྱེད་པ། ། རྨད་བྱུང་དོན་ལྡན་སྙན་དངགས་རྒྱ་ཆེའི་གཏམ་འདི་
མཁས་པའི་མདུན་སར་ཤིན་ཏུ་བསྔགས་པར་འོས། ། འཁོར་བ་པ་རྣམས་ནི་སྡུག་
བསྔལ་དཔག་ཏུ་མེད་པའི་འབྱུང་གནས་ཉོན་མོངས་དུག་གསུམ་རྒྱུས་པའི་རང་
བཞིན་ཅན་ཡིན་མོད་ཀྱི། དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས་པའི་སྙིང་པོ་རྒྱུས་ པར་འགྱུར་བའི་
རིགས་དད་པ་དང་སྙིང་རྗེ་དང་ཤེས་རབ་མཆོག་དང་ལྡན་པ་དག་ཐེག་པ་ཆེན་པོའི་
ལམ་འདིར་ཕ་རོལ་དུ་ཕྱིན་པ་དྲུག་ལ་སྤྱད་པས་བླ་ན་མེད་པའི་བྱང་ཆུབ་ཀྱང་རྙེད་
པར་དཀའ་བ་མ་ཡིན་ནོ། དེ་ཕྱིར་བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་དཔའི་སྤྱོད་པ་རྨད་དུ་བྱུང་བ་
ལ་ཡོངས་སུ་བསླབ་པར་བྱའོ། ། ། །



རབ་བྱེད་དང་པོ་གཞོན་ནུ་དྲུག་གི་
ཁྱད་ཆོས་བརྗོད་པ།
དེ་ཡང་འདི་སྐད་ཐོས་ཏེ། སྔོན་གྱི་ཚེ་སྣ་ཚོགས་འབྱིན་ཞེས་བྱ་བའི་ཡུལ་བདེ་
བ། འབྱོར་པ། ལོ་ལེགས་པ། སྐྱེ་བོ་མང་པོས་གང་བ། ལོངས་སྤྱོད་ཕུན་སུམ་
ཚོགས་པ་ནི་ལྷའི་འཇིག་རྟེན་ལ་འགྲན་པ་ཞིག་ཡོད་པར་གྱུར་ཏོ། ས་འཛིན་ཕྲེང་
བས་ཁོར་ཡུག་ཡོངས་སུ་བསྐོར། ། ཡངས་པའི་ས་མཆོག་གྲོང་ཁྱེར་རྣམས་ཀྱིས་
གང་། ། སྨན་ལྗོངས་ནགས་ཚལ་འབབ་ཆུ་དུ་མས་བརྒྱན། ། ཡུལ་གྱི་མཛེས་པ་
གསར་དུ་ཚོགས་པ་བཞིན། ། དེ་ན་འཁོད་པའི་མི་རྣམས་ཁྲིམས་ལྡན་ཞིང་། །
ཕུན་སུམ་ཚོགས་པའི་སྐལ་བ་ཅན་ཐོས་ནས། ། ནོར་དང་འབྲུ་དང་རིན་ཆེན་སྣ་
ཚོགས་པ། ། ཡུལ་གཞན་དོར་ནས་ཕྱོགས་དེར་འདུས་པ་བཞིན། ། བདེ་དང་
འབྱོར་དང་གྲགས་པའི་དཔལ་ཐོབ་ནས། ། མཐོ་རིས་བདེ་བ་རྫོགས་པར་ལོངས་
སྤྱོད་ཕྱིར། ། འཇིག་རྟེན་གཞན་དུ་བསོད་ནམས་བྱས་པ་ཡི། ། སྐྱེ་བོ་རྣམས་ནི་
ལྷན་ཅིག་སྐྱེས་པ་བཞིན། ། ཡུལ་དེའི་དབུས་ན་ཚངས་པའི་འབྱུང་གནས་ཞེས་བྱ་
བའི་གྲོང་ཁྱེར་ཆེན་པོ་རྒྱུ་ཆེ་ཞིང་ལྟ་ན་སྡུག་པ། ཁང་པ་འབུམ་ཕྲག་དུ་མ་ཡོད་པ།
ཚོང་འདུས་དང་། སྐྱེད་མོས་ཚལ་དང་། རྩེད་འཇོའི་ཁང་པ་མང་པོས་བརྒྱན་པ།
ལྷའི་གྲོང་ཁྱེར་ལྟ་ན་སྡུག་པ་ལྟ་བུ་ཞིག་ཀྱང་འདུག་གོ། ར་བ་སེར་པོས་བསྐོར་བའི་
གྲོང་ཁྱེར་ནི། ། རྣམ་པར་བཀྲ་བའི་ཁང་པའི་ཚོགས་ཀྱིས་མཛེས། །ཉིན་བྱེད་
ཟེར་གྱིས་གསལ་བར་བྱས་པ་ཡི། ། པད་མ་རབ་རྒྱས་གསེར་གྱི་རྫིང་བུ་བཞིན། །
དེ་ལ་འདུས་པའི་བུང་བའི་ཚོགས་ བཞིན་དུ། ། སྐྱེ་བོ་མང་པོ་དེ་ན་འདུ་ ཞིང་
འཁོད། ། འདོད་པའི་ཡུལ་རྣམས་བསྟེན་པས་ཚིམ་པའི་ཡིད། ། སྤྲོ་བས་བསྐུལ་ཏེ་
དགའ་བའི་གླུ་གར་བྱེད། ། འབྱོར་པ་དུ་མས་བརྒྱན་པའི་ཚོང་འདུས་དང་། ། ཡ་



མཚན་རྩེད་འཇོའི་གར་ལ་བལྟ་བ་ཡིས། ། གཡེངས་པར་གྱུར་པས་ཉིན་མཚན་མི་
དྲན་ཏེ། ། འདོད་པ་རྣམས་ལ་འདོད་ལྷ་བཞིན་དུ་སྤྱོད། །
གྲོང་ཁྱེར་དེ་ན་སྐྱེས་བུ་བླུན་ཞིང་ལེ་ལོའི་རང་བཞིན་ཅན། ཉལ་བ་དང་།
གཡེང་བ་ལ་དགའ་བ། ལེགས་ཉེས་དཔྱོད་པའི་བློ་དང་བྲལ་བ་ཞིག་ཡོད་པ་སྟེ་
ཤེས་པ་མི་གསལ་བ་དེ་ལ་འཇིག་རྟེན་པ་རྣམས་ཀྱིས་མུན་པ་ཅན་ཞེས་བཏགས་སོ།
གང་ཞིག་ནག་པོ་ བརྩེགས་ པ་ལྟར་ གནག་ པའི། ། མུན་པས་བློ་མིག་ཡོངས་སུ་
བཅིངས་ལྡན་དེ། ། རྟག་ཏུ་གཉིད་དང་སྙོམས་ལས་འབའ་ཞིག་གོམས། ། བླང་
དོར་གནས་ལས་བློ་ནི་ཕྱིར་ཕྱོགས་ནས། ། ལེགས་པའི་ལས་ནི་གང་གིས་མི་ཤེས་
པ། ། དེ་ནི་ཉེས་པའི་སྤྱོད་ལ་འཇུག་པར་མཁས། ། གཙང་སྦྲ་མེད་ཅིང་དམན་
པའི་གནས་ལ་དགའ། ། གདོལ་པའི་བྲན་བཞིན་དེ་ན་གནས་པར་གྱུར། ། དེའི་
སྤུན་གཉིས་པ་ནི། གཞོན་ནུ་འདོད་ལྷའི་བུ་ཞེས་བྱ་བ། གཟུགས་བཟང་ཞིང་
བཞིན་རས་མཛེས་པ། འབྲུ་དང་ནོར་བསྲུང་བ་ལ་གོམས་ཤིང་། ནོར་རྫས་མང་
པོས་འབྱོར་པ། རྟག་ ཏུ་ གླུ་དང་། གར་ དང༌། དགའ་མའི་གཏམ་གྱིས་དུས་
འདའ་བ། འདོད་ཡོན་ལ་ལྷག་པར་སྲིད་པས་བརྐམ་པ་དང་སེར་སྣའི་དབང་དུ་
གྱུར་ཏེ། སྦྱིན་པ་དང་ཆོག་ཤེས་པ་ལ་རྒྱབ་ཀྱིས་ཕྱོགས་པ་ཞིག་འདུག་གོ་ཞེས་
གྲགས་སོ། གཟུགས་དང་ལང་ཚོས་དྲེགས་པ་རྣམས་རྒྱུས་ཤིང༌། ། རྟག་ཏུ་ནོར་
དང་དགའ་ མའི་ གཏམ་ ལ་ ཆགས། ། སྲེད་ པའི་ ཆང་ གིས་ རབ་ ཏུ་ མྱོས་ པའི་
ཡིད། ། བག་མེད་གྱུར་པས་ངོ་ཚའི་གོས་དང་བྲལ། ། ལུས་ངན་ལྟ་བུའི་ནོར་གྱིས་
ཕྱུག་གྱུར་ཀྱང༌། ། ཆོག་ཤེས་མེད་ཅིང་འདོད་ལ་སྲེད་པའི་མིག ། གང་གིས་ཡིད་
འོང་དངོས་ པོ་ རྣམས་ མཐོང་ བ། ། དེ་ནི་ བདག་ གིར་ མ་ བཟུང་ འགའ་ ཡང་
མེད། ། དེའི་སྤུན་གསུམ་པ་ནི་ཤིན་ཏུ་གཏུམ་ཞིང་དྲག་ཤུལ་ཆེ་བ། མདོག་ནག་
ཅིང་སྐྲ་དང་ཁ་སྤུ་སེར་བ། བཞིན་འཛུམ་པ་དང་བྲལ་བ། ལུས་རྩལ་ཆེ་ཞིང་
མཚོན་ཆ་དང༌། སྒྲོགས་ དང་། འཕྲུལ་འཁོར་ སོགས་ལ་མཁས་པ། གཞན་ལ་
སྡང་ཞིང་བཟོད་པར་དཀའ་བ་དྲག་པོ་ཞེས་བྱ་བ་ཞིག་བྱུང་ངོ༌། དེ་ནི་ཤིན་ཏུ་



，
:་,་
:.
, ，་
འཇིགས་རུང་གཟུགས་འཛིན་པ། ། དཔའ་ཞིང་བརྟུལ་ཕོད་དགྲ་ཐབས་རྣམས་ལ་
མཁས། ། ཁྲོ་ཞིང་མི་བཟོད་དྲག་པོའི་ཤུགས་འཆང་བ། ། ཚིག་ཙམ་གྱིས་ཀྱང་སྐྱེ་
བོ་སྐྲག་པར་འགྱུར། ། སྐྱེ་བོ་རྣམས་ལ་གཤིན་རྗེའི་ཕོ་ཉ་བཞིན། ། སྡིག་ལ་སྲེད་པ་
སྲིན་པོ་མངོན་སུམ་བཞིན། ། མཐུ་རྩལ་ཆེན་པོ་ལྷ་མིན་དཔའ་བོ་བཞིན། ། མ་
རུངས་བརྩམས་ནས་གཞན་ལ་འཚེ་བར་བྱེད། ། དེའི་སྤུན་བཞི་པ་ནི། སྔ་མ་
རྣམས་དང་ཚུལ་མི་འདྲ་སྟེ། དད་པ་དང་། བརྩོན་འགྲུས་དང་། དྲན་པ་དང་
ལྡན་ཞིང་ཡིད་ཤིན་ཏུ་སྐྱོ་བས་འཇིག་རྟེན་གྱི་བྱ་བ་ལ་བློ་མི་འཇུག་པར་དབེན་པ་ལ་
དགའ་ཞིང་། དཀོན་མཆོག་མཆོད་པ་ལ་བརྩོན་པ། སྡིག་པའི་གོ་སྐབས་མི་བྱེད་
པ། དགེ་བ་ཅན་ཞེས་བྱ་བ་ཞིག་འདུག་གོ། ཤིན་ཏུ་སྐྱོ་བར་གྱུར་པའི་ཡིད་ཅན་
དེ། ། འཁོར་བའི་ཁྱིམ་ནི་བཙོན་ར་ལྟ་བུར་མཐོང་། ། འདོད་པའི་ལོངས་སྤྱོད་
དུག་ཆུ་འདྲར་ཤེས་ནས། ། འབྱོར་པ་རྣམས་ལ་ཕྱག་དར་རྩྭ་བཞིན་ལྟ། ། འདུ་
འཛིས་འཇིགས་ཤིང་དབེན་པར་གབ་སྟེ་འཁོད། ། དད་པའི་མཆི་མས་མིག་ནི་
ཡོངས་བཀང་སྟེ། ། ཉིན་དང་མཚན་དུ་དཀོན་མཆོག་མཆོད་བརྩོན་པ། ། བསོད་
ནམས་འབྲས་བུ་ངོམས་པ་མེད་པ་འདྲ། ། དེའི་ནུ་བོ་ཞིག་ནི། དམ་པའི་སྤྱོད་པ་
ལ་ལེགས་པར་བསླབ་པ། སྙིང་རྗེ་ཆེན་པོས་ཡིད་བརླན་པ། སེམས་ཅན་རྣམས་ལ་
ཕན་པར་བརྩོན་པ། རང་གི་སྲོག་ལའང་མི་བལྟ་བར་གཞན་གྱི་དོན་འབའ་ཞིག་
བྱེད་པ་ཞིག་བྱུང་བས། དེ་ལ་སྐྱེ་བོའི་ཚོགས་ཀྱིས་མཉེས་གཤིན་བཟང་པོ་ཞེས་
འབོད་ཅིང་ལྷག་པར་དགའ་བར་གྱུར་ཏོ། བྱམས་དང་སྙིང་རྗེའི་དབང་དུ་གྱུར་པ་
དེ། ། དགྲ་བོ་དག་ལའང་ཕ་མ་བཞིན་དུ་ལྟ། ། ཕོངས་པ་རྣམས་ལ་མཉེས་གཤིན་
བཟང་པོ་སྟེ། ། སྲོག་ལའང་མི་ལྟ་གཞན་ཕན་བསྒྲུབ་ལ་འབད། ། སྡུག་བསྔལ་
གྱུར་པའི་སྐྱེ་བོ་མཐོང་བ་ན། ། དེ་ནི་དེ་བས་ལྷག་པའི་སྡུག་བསྔལ་འགྱུར། །
གཞན་དག་བདེ་བས་དེ་ཡིད་དགའ་འགྱུར་བ། ། རང་ཉིད་བདེ་བས་དེ་ཙམ་མགུ་
བ་མེད། ། སྤུན་དྲུག་གི་ཐ་ཆུང་གཞོན་ནུ་ལེགས་པའི་བློ་གྲོས་ཞེས་བྱ་བ། མཁས་
ཤིང་ཡིད་གཞུངས་པ། ཤེས་རབ་དང་སྤོབས་པ་ནི་མཆོག་ཏུ་གྱུར། བླང་བ་དང་



དོར་བའི་གནས་བརྟག་པ་ལ་ནི་མཁས། བཟོའི་གནས་དང་རིག་བྱེད་དང་བསྟན་
བཅོས་རྣམས་ལ་ནི་བྱང་། དྲན་དང་ཤེས་བཞིན་དུ་ནི་སྤྱོད། བྲམ་ཟེ་དང་རྒན་
རབས་ལ་ནི་གུས། ཕོངས་པ་དང་མགོན་མེད་པ་རྣམས་ནི་ཡོངས་སུ་སྐྱོང་། སྐྱེ་བོ་
རྣམས་ལ་ནི་སློབ་དཔོན་དང་འདྲ་བར་གདམས་ངག་སྟོན་པར་བྱེད་དོ། དེ་ལྟ་བུའི་
ཡོན་ཏན་མང་པོ་དང་རྟག་ཏུ་འདྲིས་ པ་ཞིག་བྱུང་བར་གྱུར་ཏོ། བློ་ལྡན་དེ་ནི་
མཁས་ཀྱང་ང་རྒྱལ་མེད། ། ཆེན་པོར་གྱུར་ཀྱང་ཉམ་ཆུང་ཁྱད་མི་ གསོད། །
གཞོན་ཡང་ལང་ཚོའི་དྲེགས་པས་རྒྱགས་དང་བྲལ། ། བདེ་ཞིང་འབྱོར་ཡང་འདོད་
པས་མྱོས་མ་གྱུར། ། འཇིག་རྟེན་གཙུག་ལག་གཞུང་ལུགས་ཇི་སྙེད་པ། ། དེ་ཡིས་
ཁོང་དུ་ མ་ ཆུད་ ཅི་ ཞིག་ ཡོད། ། ཤིན་ ཏུ་ སྦྱངས་ པས་ བླང་ དོར་ གནས་ རྣམས་
ཀུན། ། བློ་ཡིས་རྟོགས་ཏེ་ལེགས་པའི་ཚུལ་ལ་འཇུག ། དྲི་མ་མེད་ཅིང་གསལ་
བའི་བློ་གྲོས་ནི། ། ཆ་ཤས་ཡོངས་རྫོགས་སྟོན་ཟླའི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་བཞིན། ། འགྲོ་
བ་དག་ལ་ཕན་པའི་ལམ་སྟོན་པ། ། སྐྱེ་རྒུ་རྣམས་ལ་ཉི་མ་ལྟ་བུར་སྣང་། ། ཀུན་གྱི་
རེ་སྐོང་དཔག་བསམ་ལྗོན་པ་བཞིན། ། མན་ངག་སྟོན་པས་བཤེས་གཉེན་དམ་པ་
བཞིན། ། མང་པོས་བཀུར་བས་ས་སྐྱོང་ཆེན་པོ་ བཞིན། ། ལྷུན་པོ་བཞིན་དུ་
འཇིག་རྟེན་འདི་ན་བརྗིད། ། འོད་ཟེར་སྟོང་ཕྲག་ལྡན་པས་པད་མོའི་གཉེན། །
ཀུ་མུད་རྒྱས་པའི་ཕྲེང་བས་ཡིད་བཞིན་མཚོ། ། ནགས་ཚལ་རྣམས་ཀྱིས་ རི་བོ་
བརྒྱན་པ་ལྟར། ། ཡོན་ཏན་ཚོགས་ཀྱིས་བློ་ཆེན་འདི་ཉིད་མཛེས། ། དེ་ཡི་མིང་ནི་
ལེགས་པའི་བློ་གྲོས་ཞེས། ། ཤེས་ལྡན་ཀུན་གྱི་རྣ་བའི་རྒྱན་དུ་གྱུར། ། ངག་གི་སྲད་
བུས་ལེགས་པར་བརྒྱུས་པ་ཡི། ། ཡོན་ཏན་གྲགས་པ་རིན་ཆེན་ཕྲེང་བ་བཞིན། །
དེ་ལྟར་གཞོན་ནུར་གྱུར་པ་སྤུན་དྲུག་པོ་དེ་དག་ ལྷན་ ཅིག་ ཏུ་སྤྱོད་ཅིང་། འཇིག་
རྟེན་གྱི་སྐྱོན་དང་ཡོན་ཏན་གསལ་བར་སྟོན་པའི་མེ་ལོང་བཞིན་དུ་གྲོང་ཁྱེར་དེ་ན་
འཁོད་དོ། མེ་ཡི་དྲོད་དང་རླུང་གི་ཤུགས་ལྟར་སྐྱོན་དང་ཡོན་ཏན་རྟག་ཏུ་འགྲོགས་
ལྡན་གཞོན་ནུ་དེ་དག་ལྷན་ཅིག་གནས་ཀྱང་ཕན་ཚུན་སྤྱོད་པ་མཚུངས་མ་གྱུར། །
སྨན་གྱི་ཤིང་དང་དུག་གི་ནགས་ཚལ་ས་གཞིའི་ངོས་ལ་མཉམ་དུ་སྐྱེ་ཡང་ཕན་དང་



རྒྱུད༌
རབ་ཏུ་བྱེད་པ་དང་པོའོ། ། ། །།
པ་གོམས་པའི་ཕྱིར་ངང་ཚུལ་མཚུངས་པར་མི་འགྱུར་རོ་ཞེས་ཤེས་པར་བྱའོ། །
དམན་པ་རྣམས་ལྷན་ཅིག་ཏུ་སྐྱེས་ཀྱང་ཡུན་རིང་པོར་ལེགས་པ་དང་ཉེས་པའི་སྤྱོད་
དཀར་བའི་མདོག་ཅན་ཆུ་གཏེར་རྣམས་ཀྱི་རྒྱུན་དུ་གྱུར། ། དེ་ལྟར་དམ་པ་དང་
འདབ་བརྒྱ་ལྡན་པ་འདམ་ནང་གནས་ཀྱང་འདམ་གྱིས་མ་གོས་དྲི་མ་མེད་ཅིང་
ཡང་ཡང་ཕྱིས་ཀྱང་ཁ་དོབ་་དཀར་པོར་མི་འགྱུར་ཞིང༌། ། འདམ་རྫབ་ལས་སྐྱེས་
པོའི་སོལ་བ་ལ་ནི་ཡན་ལག་བརྒྱད་ལྡན་ཆུ་ཡིས་བཀྲུས་ཤིང་རས་དཀར་བཟང་པོས་
གནོད་པའི་རང་བཞིན་ཅན་གྱི་ནུས་པ་སོ་སོར་སྨིན་པ་མཐོང་། ། རང་བཞིན་ནག་
བ
སད་རྨས་སྐྱཚད་ཆ་ཆུབ་ལ༠ ཙས་རིམ་ཆ་མཐདཀརཔ་ s@t༡༨ བར -..བུམ་ཆའི་ཆབ༠-༥..............……....…...ཆ
:



རབ་བྱེད་གཉིས་པ་སྦྱིན་པའི་ཕན་
ཡོན་ལ་བསྔགས་པ།
དེ་ནས་རེ་ཞིག་དཔྱིད་ཀྱི་དུས་སུ་གྱུར་ཏེ། དབྱར་གྱི་དགའ་སྟོན་ཉེ་བར་གྱུར་
མཐོང་ནས། ། མྱུ་གུའི་ཚོགས་ཀྱི་སྤུ་ལོང་རབ་རྒྱས་པའི། ། ནོར་འཛིན་དགའ་མ་
གདུང་བའི་དྲོད་འབར་ཞིང་། ། ལུས་ཀྱི་རྡུལ་བཞིན་ཆབ་རོམ་བཞུ་བ་འབབ། །
དེ་ཐོས་དགའ་བའི་སྲེད་པ་འཕེལ་བ་ཡིས། ། ཅུང་ཟད་དམར་བར་གྱུར་པའི་ལུས་
འཛིན་པ། ། འཁྲི་ཤིང་རྣམས་ནི་འཛུམ་པ་གསལ་བྱེད་ཅིང་། ། གཡོ་བའི་ལྕེ་ཡིས་
གྲོགས་ལ་སྒྲོན་པ་བཞིན། ། དཔལ་དང་ལྡན་པའི་ཡུལ་ཕྱོགས་དེ་མཐོང་ནས། །
རླུང་གི་རྒྱལ་པོ་ཕྲག་དོག་སྐྱེས་པ་ཡིས། ། ཡིད་འོང་རྒྱན་རྣམས་འཕྲོག་པར་འདོད་
པ་བཞིན། ། རླུང་དམར་ཆེན་པོ་ཡང་ཡང་དྲག་ཏུ་ལྡང་། ། ནམ་མཁའི་ལམ་ནས་
སྤྲིན་གྱི་རྒྱལ་པོ་དག ། མགྱོགས་ཁྱད་འགྲན་བཞིན་རླུང་གི་རྟ་བཞོན་ནས། ། ཤར་
གྱི་ཕྱོགས་སུ་རིངས་པར་རྒྱུག་པ་ནི། ། ལུས་འཕགས་གླིང་གི་དགའ་སྟོན་སྙེགས་པ་
བཞིན། ། རྡུལ་གྱི་ཕུང་པོས་ཕྱོགས་ཀུན་རབ་དཀྲིགས་ཤིང༌། ། ཉི་མའི་གདུང་བ་
ཉིས་འགྱུར་བཞིན་མཐོང་ནས། ། སྐྱེ་བོ་རྣམས་ནི་ཕྱི་རོལ་མི་བགྲོད་པར། ། འཆི་
མེད་གྲོང་གི་ནང་ན་དགའ་བཞིན་འདུག ། དེ་ལྟར་གྱུར་པའི་ཚེ་ཡང་། གཞོན་ནུ་
འདོད་ལྷའི་བུ་ནི་ནོར་གྱི་རྙེད་པ་འཚོལ་བའི་ཕྱིར་ཡུལ་གཞན་དུ་རྒྱུ་བར་འདོད་ནས་
ནུ་བོ་རྣམས་ལ་སྨྲས་པ། ཉལ་ཞིང་འདུག་པས་འབྱོར་པ་བརླག་འགྱུར་ཏེ། །
ངོགས་སུ་འགྱེལ་བའི་སྡོང་པོ་རུལ་བ་བཞིན། ། བདག་ཅག་རྙེད་དང་བཀུར་སྟི་
འཚོལ་བའི་ཕྱིར། ། ལྗོངས་རྣམས་རྒྱུ་ཞིང་ཡུལ་གཞན་འདོང་བར་རིགས། ། ཞེས་
ཏེ། ཕུ་བོ་གསུམ་ནི་གྲོང་ཁྱེར་དེ་ལས་ཕྱིར་བྱུང་ནས་དོང་ངོ་། ནུ་བོ་གསུམ་ཡང་
སྤུན་རྣམས་ལ་བརྩེ་བས། དེ་དག་ཉེས་སུ་དོགས་པའི་ཕྱིར་ཕྱི་བཞིན་དུ་འགྲོ་བར་
|



བྱེད་དོ། ། དེ་ལྟར་མཐར་གྱིས་དོང་བ་ལས། གྲོང་ཁྱེར་དེའི་ཤར་ཕྱོགས་ཀྱི་སྲང་སྒོ་
ན་དབུལ་མོ་ཞིག་ཁྱེའུ་བཙས་པ་ལས་ནད་ཀྱིས་འགགས་ནས་ལུས་རྫོགས་པར་མ་
ཐོན་ཏེ། ཟུག་རྔུ་དཔག་ཏུ་མེད་པ་དང་ལྡན་པས་ཆོ་ངེས་གནས་དེ་འགེངས་པ་
བཞིན་དུ་གྱུར་པ་མཐོང་ངོ་། དེ་མཐོང་ནས་གཞོན་ནུ་མཉེས་གཤིན་བཟང་པོ་ཤིན་
ཏུ་སྙིང་རྗེ་བར་གྱུར་ཏེ་སྨྲས་པ། ཀྱི་ཧུད་ཕུ་མའི་གོས་གྱོན་ཞིང་། ། ལུས་ཕྱེད་ཐོན་
ཏེ་སྐད་ངན་འབྱིན། ། སྒྲ་གཅན་གྱིས་ཟོས་ཟླ་བ་ཡི། ། དུམ་བུ་དང་མཚུངས་འདི་
སུ་ཞིག ། རྨོངས་པས་འདོད་ཆགས་དུག་བཏུངས་པའི། ། ཟུག་རྔུ་ཁོང་དུ་རབ་
རྒྱས་པས། ། དུག་སྦྲུལ་གྱིས་བཞིན་ལུས་བཅོམ་མ། །ཀྱེ་མ་དབང་བྲལ་མ་རེ་སྡུག།
གཞོན་ནུ་ལེགས་པའི་བློ་གྲོས་ཀྱིས་སྨྲས་པ། འདི་ནི་རྒ་དང་ན་བ་དང་། ། འཆི་
བའི་ཟུག་རྔུ་རིམ་པ་བཞིན། ། སྐྱེ་བ་ཞེས་བྱ་ལུས་ཅན་གྱིས། ། སྡུག་བསྔལ་འཕྲུལ་
འཁོར་དང་པོ་ཡིན། ། ལས་ཀྱི་སྐྱེས་བུས་རྒྱུད་ལྔའི་ལམ་དུ་བར་དོའི་སེམས་ནི་སྲེད་
པའི་ཞགས་པས་བཅིངས་ཤིང་རང་དབང་མེད་པར་ཁྲིད། ། སྲིན་པོའི་གྲོང་ཁྱེར་
མ་ཡི་མངལ་དུ་ཁུ་ཁྲག་བཤང་གཅིའི་འདམ་གྱིས་སྦགས་ཤིང་ལུས་ཀྱི་ལྕགས་ཁང་
དོག་པོར་བཅུག ། མནར་མེད་དང་ནི་ཀྱི་ཧུད་ཁྲོད་ལྟར་ཆུ་བུར་ལུས་ཀྱིས་ཚ་དང་
གྲང་བའི་སྡུག་བསྔལ་བགྲང་ཡས་ཀུན་ཏུ་མྱོང་། ། སླར་ཡང་མི་བཟད་ཟུག་རྔུ་དང་
བཅས་ལྷུང་བར་བྱེད་འདི་སྐྱེ་འགྲོ་ཀུན་གྱི་ལས་ངན་འབྲས་བུ་དང་པོ་ཉིད། །
མངལ་གྱི་སྒོ་ཡིས་བསྡམས་པ་འདི་ནི་འཇིགས་རུང་འཁོར་བའི་བཙོན་རར་འཇུག་
པའི་ཐོག་མ་ཡིན། ། ཕྲུ་མའི་དྲ་བས་དཀྲིས་པ་འདི་ཡང་ལས་ཀྱི་འཆི་བདག་ཞགས་
པ་འདེབས་པའི་ཐོག་མ་འོ། ། ངུ་སྐད་ལྷང་ལྷང་སྒྲོག་པ་འདི་དག་སྡུག་བསྔལ་སྨེ་
ངག་བརྒྱུད་མར་འདོན་པའི་ཐོག་མ་སྟེ། ། རྩུབ་མོའི་མལ་དུ་ལྷུང་བ་འདི་འདྲ་ཉོན་
མོངས་སྲེག་ཟའི་འོབ་ཏུ་འཇུག་པའི་ཐོག་མ་ཉིད། ། འདི་ལྟར་ཤིན་ཏུ་འཇིགས་
རུང་བའི། ། སྐྱེ་བའི་ཆུ་རྒྱུན་མ་བཅད་ན། ། རིགས་དྲུག་ལུས་ཀྱི་ཕྲེང་བ་ཡི། །
སྡུག་ བསྔལ་ཟོ་ཆུན་ རྒྱུན་བཞིན་འཁོར། ། དེ་སྐད་སྨྲས་ནས་རིམ་བཞིན་ཡུལ་
རྣམས་སུ་རྒྱུ་བ་ལས། གྲོང་ཁྱེར་གཞན་ཞིག་གི་སྒོ་དྲུང་ན་སློང་མོ་བའི་སྐྱེ་བོ་ཡི་



དྭགས་ལྟར་ལུས་རིད་ཅིང༌། མདོག་སྔོ་སྐྱར་གྱུར་པ། སྐྲ་འཛིངས་པ། མགྲིན་པ་
ནི་བསྐམས་ཤིང་ལུས་ཀྱི་ཕྱི་ནང་ཐལ་བྱུང་དུ་མཐོང་བ་ལྟ་བུ་འགའ་ཞིག་འདུག་པ་དེ་
དག་གིས་གཞོན་ནུ་རྣམས་འོང་བ་མཐོང་ནས་མི་ནུས་བཞིན་དུ་ལངས་ཤིང་ཕྱག་
འཚལ་ཏེ་ཤིང་སྐམ་གྱི་ཡལ་ག་རེངས་པ་ལྟ་བུའི་ལག་པ་བརྐྱངས་ནས་འདི་སྐད་ཅེས་
སྨྲས་སོ། ཀྱི་ཧུད་རབ་རྒྱས་ནགས་ཚལ་དུ། ། ཤིང་སྐམ་འབའ་ཞིག་འབྲས་མེད་
ལྟར། ། འབྱོར་ལྡན་གྲོང་འདིར་བསོད་ནམས་ཀྱི། ། བརླན་བྲལ་བདག་ཅག་ཁོ་ན་
དབུལ། ། རྒྱུད་ལ་དགེ་བའི་འཁྲི་ཤིང་གི། ། ས་བོན་བཏབ་ལས་དཔལ་འབྱོར་
གྱི། ། ཡལ་འདབ་རབ་རྒྱས་ཁྱོད་ལྟ་བུ། ། ལེགས་བྱས་རྐང་འཐུང་འཁྲུངས་པ་
ཉིད། ། ཁྲོན་ པའི་ ཆུ་ ནི་ རབ་ བཅུས་ དང་། ། ལྗོན་ པའི་ ཡལ་ ག་ བཅད་ལས་
འཕེལ། ། འཇིག་རྟེན་འདི་ དང་ ཕ་རོལ་ གྱི། ། ལོངས་སྤྱོད་སྦྱིན་པ་ཉིད་ལས་
འབྱུང༌། ། འཚོ་བའི་ལུས་ནི་སྒྱུ་རྩལ་དང༌། ། རིགས་ནི་མཆོག་རྣམས་ཡོན་ཏན་
དང༌། ། སྨྲ་ བ་ པོ་ ནི་ བདེན་ པས་ བཞིན། ། ཕུན་ཚོགས་ རྒྱས་ པ་ གཏོང་བས་
མཛེས། ། དེ་ཕྱིར་སྦྱིན་པའི་རིན་ཆེན་གྱིས། ། དབུལ་ཕོངས་བདག་ཅག་ཚིམ་པ་
དང༌། ། འཇིག་ རྟེན་ འདི་ ཡང་ གྲགས་པ་ཡི། ། ནོར་ གྱིས་ རབ་ ཏུ་ གང་ བར་
མཛོད། ། དེ་སྐད་ཅེས་སྨྲས་པ་དང་། གཞོན་ནུ་གསུམ་པོ་དེས་རང་རང་གི་གོས་
ཀ་ཤི་ཀའི་རས་བཟང་པོ་གསེར་སྲང་འབུམ་ཕྲག་རི་བ་རྣམས་དང་། རིན་པོ་ཆེ་དུ་
མ་ལས་བྱས་པའི་རྣ་ཆ། འགུལ་རྒྱན། གདུབ་ སྐོར། ཕྲེང་བའི་དོ་ ཤལ་ དང་
བཅས་པ་ཕུད་དེ་ཕོངས་པ་དག་ལ་བསྟབས་ ཤིང༌། རང་གི་འཚོག་ཆས་ཇི་སྙེད་
ཡོད་པ་རྣམས་ཀྱང་མ་ལུས་པར་བྱིན་ནས་དེ་དག་གི་འཚེམ་བུའི་གོས་རྙིང་པ་ཧྲལ་
རྡུལ་དུ་གྱུར་པ་ཤིག་སྲོའི་ཕྲེང་བ་མུ་ཏིག་གི་དྲ་བ་ལྟར་བཀྲ་བས་གཡོགས་པ་དེ་དག་
བླངས་ཏེ་གྱོན་ནས་སེམས་མགུ་བཞིན་དུ་འདུག་གོ ། དེ་མཐོང་བ་དང༌། གཞོན་
ནུ་འདོད་ལྷའི་བུས་ཁྲེལ་བས་དགོད་པ་དང་བཅས་པས་སྨྲས་པ། ཡ་མཚན་སྤྱོད་
ཚུལ་འདི་ལ་ལྟོས། ། ཧ་ཅང་སྦྱིན་ལ་དཔའ་བས་ཉམས། ། རང་ཉིད་སྤྱད་པའི་
ལྷག་མ་དག ། གཞན་ལ་སྦྱིན་ པ་ མཛེས་པ་ཉིད། ། འབུམ་ཕྲག་རི་བའི་གོས་
1:|:#:
1:1
21:
11 :|
:ཀྱི་
2
:2
:



བཟང་དང་། ། རིན་ཆེན་རྒྱུན་རྣམས་བཏང་ནས་ནི། ། ཤིག་སྲོས་བརྒྱན་པའི་
གོས་ཐོབ་པ། ། ཁྱོད་ཅག་ཚོང་གི་བསྐྱེད་ལ་མཁས། །ཞེས་སོ། དེ་ནས་གཞོན་ནུ་
ལེགས་པའི་བློ་གྲོས་ཀྱིས། བདག་ཉིད་སྦྱིན་ལ་དགའ་བའི་ཆེ་བ་བསྟན་པའི་ཕྱིར་
ཚིགས་སུ་བཅད་དེ་སྨྲས་པ། གྲོགས་པོ་བདག་ཅག་སེར་སྣ་གོམས་མ་གྱུར། ། ལུས་
དང་རྫས་ལ་ཆགས་ཤིང་བརྐུམས་པ་མེད། ། ཕོངས་པས་རླབས་ཆེར་སློང་ཕོད་
མཐོང་གྱུར་ན། ། དགེ་ཚོགས་འཕེལ་ཕྱིར་དེ་ནི་རྙེད་པའི་མཆོག ། རང་གི་མགོ་
དང་མིག་འབྲས་རྐང་ལག་དང་། ། སྲོག་ཀྱང་གཏོང་ནི་བུ་དང་ཆུང་མ་འམ། །
སྙིང་པོ་མེད་པའི་ལོངས་སྤྱོད་སྨོས་ཅི་དགོས། ། མཁས་པས་མི་སྦྱིན་པ་ནི་ཅི་ཡང་
མེད། ། ཕོངས་པ་རྣམས་ལ་བདོག་པ་ཀུན་བཏང་ན། ། སྲིད་དང་ཞི་བའི་དཔལ་
འབྱོར་བླ་མེད་འཐོབ། ། བསོད་ནམས་ཚོང་ཟོང་འདི་ལྟ་བསྔགས་འོས་ཏེ། །
འཇུངས་ཤིང་འདོད་ལ་བརྐམས་པའི་སྤྱོད་ཡུལ་མིན། ། སློང་བ་ཕྱིར་བཟློག་རེ་
ཐག་བཅད་པ་ཡི། ། ཤུགས་རིང་རླུང་གིས་བུས་པའི་མྱ་ངན་མེས། ། རང་གི་
གྲགས་པའི་ ལྗོན་ ཤིང་ སྲེག་ བྱེད་ པ། ། རྨོངས་ པ་ དེ་ ནི་ གསོན་ ཡང་ ཤི་ དང་
མཚུངས། ། སྦྱིན་པ་མི་དགེ་འཇོམས་པའི་དཔའ་བོ་སྟེ། ། ཡིད་ལ་རེ་བའི་འབྲས་
སྟེར་དཔག་བསམ་ཤིང་། ། ཡོན་ཏན་ཡོངས་སུ་སྒྲོག་བྱེད་རྔ་ཆེན་ཡིན། ། བསོད་
ནམས་འབྲས་བུ་མི་ཟད་གཏེར་དང་མཚུངས། ། དེ་སྐད་སྨྲས་པ་དང༌། ཕུ་བོ་
གསུམ་ཡང་ཅང་མི་སྨྲ་བར་གྱུར་ཏོ། སྦྱིན་པས་དཔའ་རྣམས་ཕོངས་པའི་མགྲོན་ལ་
རེ་བ་ལས་ཀྱང་ལྷག་པར་གཏོང༌། ། འཇུངས་པ་རྣམས་ནི་རང་ཉིད་འཚོ་ཕྱིར་ཟས་
དང་སྐོམ་ཡང་སྤྱོད་མི་ནུས། ། ཀྱེ་མ་མཆོག་དང་དམན་པའི་སྤྱོད་པ་ཁྱད་ པར་
བསམ་གྱིས་མི་ཁྱབ་སྟེ། ། ངང་ཚུལ་དེ་ཉིད་ནོར་འཛིན་གཞི་དང་རྒྱུ་སྐར་ལམ་གྱི་
བར་ལས་རིང༌། ། སྙིང་སྟོབས་ལྡན་རྣམས་འགྲོ་ཀུན་སྒྲོལ་བའི་འཁུར་ཆེན་དཔུང་
པའི་མཐུ་ཡིས་བཟོད། ། དམན་པའི་སྐྱེ་བོ་བདག་གི་དོན་ཡང་སྒྲུབ་ལ་ངལ་ཞིང་
སྒྱིད་ལུག་གནས། ། རབ་བརྟན་གླང་པོས་ལྷ་དབང་དཔུང་བཅས་ཤིང་རྟ་འདྲེན་
ཞིང་ལྷ་མིན་བཟློག ། ཝ་སྐྱེས་དག་ནི་རང་གི་མཇུག་མ་ ས་ལ་འདྲུད་ཅིང་འགྲོ་



ནས
siལ་བབ•༌ས
=5s
ནམ
-
ས།-ལ༌གཞལ་
བའང་མཐོང་། །
དེ་ནས་གཞོན་ནུ་དེ་དག་ཤར་གྱི་ཕྱོགས་སུ་རིམ་གྱིས་དོང་དོང་བ་ལས། ཡུལ་
ཁམས་དེའི་རྒྱལ་པོ་ཡུལ་འཁོར་སྐྱོང་ཞེས་བྱ་བའི་ཕོ་བྲང་འཕགས་རྒྱལ་ཞེས་པ།
ཁོར་ཡུག་སྐྱེད་མོས་ཚལ་རྣམ་པ་དུ་མས་བསྐོར་བ། ཏཱ་ལའི་ཕྲེང་བས་མཚན་པའི་
འོབ་རིམ་པ་བདུན་ཆུ་གཙང་མ་ཡིད་དུ་འོང་བས་གང་བ། ར་བ་རིམ་པ་བདུན་
དང༌། ཁང་པའི་ཁོར་ཡུག་བདུན་གྱིས་རྣམ་པར་ཕྱེ་བའི་དབུས་ན། ཁང་བཟང་
རིན་པོ་ཆེ་སྣ་ཚོགས་ལས་གྲུབ་པ་ལྷའི་གཞལ་མེད་ཁང་ལྟ་བུ་ན། མིའི་དབང་པོ་
བཙུན་མོའི་ འཁོར་ དང་ མདུན་ ན་ འདོན། བློན་ པོའི་ ཚོགས་ དང་ བཅས་ པ།
མངོན་པར་མཐོ་བའི་དཔལ་ལ་ལོངས་སུ་སྤྱོད་ ཅིང་། ཀུན་དགའི་གཏམ་དང་།
གླུ་གར་གྱིས་ཕྱོགས་ཀུན་གང་བར་བྱས་ཏེ་འདུག་པ་དང་ཉེ་བར་ཕྱིན་ཏོ། དེ་ལྟ་
བུའི་འབྱོར་པས་གཞོན་ནུ་འདོད་ལྷའི་བུ་ཡིད་ཕྲོགས་པར་གྱུར་ཏེ་སྨྲས་པ། ཀ་ཡེ་
སྐལ་བ་ཕུན་སུམ་ཚོགས། ། མངའ་ཐང་རྫོགས་པའི་དཔལ་འབྱོར་ཅན། ། འདི་
བས་ལྷག་པ་སྲིད་གསུམ་ན་བསོད་ནམས་ཟོང་གིས་འཐོབ་པ་མེད། ། རབ་བརྗིད་
གསེར་གྱི་རི་དང་ནི། ། རོལ་མཚོ་བདུན་གྱིས་བསྐོར་བ་ཡི། ། ལྷུན་པོ་ཞེས་བྱ་
སྐབས་གསུམ་གནས། ། དེ་ནི་འདི་ཡིན་གཞན་མ་ཡིན། ། རིན་ཆེན་བ་ གམ་
གཞལ་མེད་ཁང་། ། རྒྱུན་གྱིས་ལྕི་བར་གྱུར་པ་ཡིས། ། ལྷ་ཡི་ཁང་བཟང་རྣམ་པར་
རྒྱས། ། ས་གཞི་ལ་ནི་བབས་པ་བཞིན། ། ལྗོན་ཤིང་མེ་ཏོག་རབ་རྒྱས་པའི། །
ཡིད་འོང་སྐྱེད་ཚལ་འདི་མཐོང་ན། ། དགའ་བའི་ཚལ་གྱི་བྱ་རྣམས་ཀྱང༌། །
དབུལ་པོ་བཞིན་དུ་ཞུམ་པར་གྱུར། ། བདེ་ཞིང་འབྱོར་པའི་ཡུལ་ཁམས་འདིར། །
ལེགས་བྱས་ལྡན་པ་ཀུན་སྐྱེས་པས། ། འཆི་མེད་གྲོང་གི་ཉེ་འཁོར་ཡང་། ། ད་ལྟ་
སྟོང་པར་མ་གྱུར་ཏམ། ། འཛམ་བུ་གླིང་གི་ལྟ་ན་སྡུག ། མི་ཡི་མངའ་བདག་མིག་
སྟོང་ཅན། ། ས་ལ་གནས་པའི་མཐོ་རིས་ནི། ། སུམ་རྩེན་སྐྱེ་བོའི་སྙེམས་པ་འཕྲོག།
རིན་ཆེན་ཚོགས་ ལྡན་བང་མཛོད་ཀྱིས། ། གདེངས་ཅན་བདག་པོ་སྐྱེངས་བྱས་
ནས། ། དཔའ་ཞིང་བརྟུལ་ཕོད་དཔུང་གི་ཚོགས། ། ལྷ་མིན་གཡུལ་ལས་རྒྱལ་
E519]
a7:33:25:45
1:
:
10
1:|:



འདོད་བཞིན། ། རྒྱལ་ཕྲན་སྟོང་ཕྲག་རྣམས་ཀྱི་ནི། ། སྤྱི་བོར་བཀའ་ནི་ངལ་བསོ་
བཞིན། ། ཟུར་ མིག་ བརྡ་ དང་ ཚིག་ ཙམ་ གྱིས། ། སྐྱེ་ རྒུའི་ བྱ་ བ་ སྒྲུབ་ འདི་
མཚར། ། འདི་ལྟའི་དཔལ་འབྱོར་མཐོང་བ་ན། ། ལུས་ངན་བུ་ཡང་དྲེགས་པ་
ཉམས། ། མི་རུ་སྐྱེས་ཀྱང་དབུལ་ཕོངས་ཤིང༌། ། རྣམ་དཔྱོད་ལྡན་ཡང་དབང་
བྲལ་བ། ། བདག་ཅག་གསོན་ཡང་ཤི་བ་སྟེ། ། ཁ་ཟས་ལྡན་ཡང་འཚོ་བ་བྲལ། །
གོས་ཀྱིས་བཀབ་པའི་གཅེར་བུ་དང་། ། མི་ཡི་ལུས་ཅན་ཡི་དྭགས་ཡིན། ། སྐྱོ་བ་
མེད་པའི་ཁང་བཟང་དབུས་ན་བློན་པོའི་ཚོགས་ཀྱིས་སྤྱི་བོས་ཞབས་བསྟེན་བཀའ་
ཡིས་ཡུལ་ལ་དབང་སྒྱུར་ཞིང་། ། རེག་ན་བདེ་བའི་གོས་བཟང་རྣམས་དང་རིན་
ཆེན་སྣ་ཚོགས་རྒྱན་གྱིས་སྤུད་ཅིང་རོ་བརྒྱ་ལྡན་པས་ཚིམས་གྱུར་ལ། ། རི་དྭགས་
མིག་ཅན་མཛེས་མ་དག་དང་སེང་གེའི་ཁྲི་ལ་ལྷན་ཅིག་ཉལ་ཞིང་རྒྱུད་མངས་སྒྲ་ཡིས་
སད་པར་བྱེད། ། འདི་ལྟའི་འབྱོར་པ་སྲིད་གསུམ་ན་མེད་གལ་ཏེ་སྐལ་བའི་ཆ་ཤས་
ཡོད་ན་རྨི་ལམ་དུ་ཡང་འཐོབ་པར་ཤོག ། གཞོན་ནུ་ལེགས་པའི་བློ་གྲོས་ཀྱིས་དེ་
ལོངས་སྤྱོད་ལ་སྲེད་པ་བཟློག་པར་འདོད་ནས་ཚིགས་སུ་བཅད་དེ་སྨྲས་པ། གྲོགས་
དག་ཚུར་ཉོན་འདོད་པའི་ཞགས་པ་ཐོངས། ། རང་གི་འཚོ་བས་ཆོག་ཤེས་ལྡན་
པར་གྱིས། ། འབྱོར་པ་སྡུག་བསྔལ་བརྒྱ་ཕྲག་འབྱུང་གནས་ཏེ། ། ཆོག་ཤེས་ལྡན་
པ་རྨད་བྱུང་བདེ་བའི་གཏེར། ། ལོངས་སྤྱོད་མཐར་བྱེད་དུག་དང་མཚུངས་པ་
སྟེ། ། དང་པོ་རབ་ཞིམ་ཕྱིས་ནས་འཕུང་བར་བྱེད། ། ཇི་ཙམ་སྤྱད་ཀྱང་མི་ངོམས་
སླར་ཡང་ནི། ། གདུང་བ་འཕེལ་བས་ལན་ཚྭའི་ཆུ་བོ་བཞིན། ། འདོད་ཡོན་བྱིན་
ཟའི་འོད་ལ་ཆགས་པ་རྣམས། ། ཕྱེ་མ་ལེབ་བཞིན་འདི་ དང་ ཕྱི་མར་སྲེག །
བསགས་དང་བསྲུང་དང་བརླག་པའི་སྡུག་བསྔལ་ཅན། ། སྦྲང་རྩི་གཉེར་བའི་སྦྲང་
བུ་ཇི་བཞིན་ནོ། ། ཕོངས་དང་འབྱོར་པ་ལྡན་པའི་ལོངས་སྤྱོད་ཁྱད། ། མི་ཟད་
སྡུག་བསྔལ་འཁུར་ཡང་དེ་ཙམ་སྟེ། ། གསེར་གྱི་རི་ཡིས་ནོན་པ་བརླག་འགྱུར་
ལ། ། ཤིང་ཤུན་གྱོན་པའི་སྐྱེ་བོ་བདེ་བར་གནས། ། འབངས་རྣམས་རེ་རེའི་སྡུག་
བསྔལ་ཇི་སྙེད་པ། ། དེ་དག་རྒྱལ་པོའི་ཡིད་ལ་གདུང་བའི་ཁུར། ། ཟས་དང་གོས་
1



srr
=
5
མགར་
7: 4.A I/f#*#nyifs**s/hA4st**$14fANJ#***4A348495449*f\*??W
d :38a8#****:Ti#****
**fir/%A94879#* gg**?452《r/?'s
2:3,479#* :44ff;
!!! 11883
9 4&Mag:
39:
3
8 y4gJསge/3332447 738314
ཀྱིས་ཀུན་ཀྱང་འཚོ་བར་གནས། ། དེ་ལས་ལྷག་པ་རྒྱལ་པོས་སྤྱོད་མ་ཡིན། ། ཡུལ་
འཁོར་སྐྱོང་ ལ་ རྟག་ ཏུ་ ལུས་ སེམས་ བྲེལ། ། དགྲ་ རྣམས་ བསྲུང་ སླད་ ཡ་ ངའི་
འཇིགས་དང་བཅོས། ། ས་བདག་ཅེས་པ་སྙན་པའི་གྲགས་ལྡན་ཡང་། ། སྐྱེ་འགྲོ་
ཀུན་གྱི་འབངས་སུ་གནས་པ་ཉིད། ། རྣམ་པར་གྲོལ་བའི་འབྲས་བུ་སྨིན་རུང་
བའི། ། ལེགས་བྱས་ས་བོན་ཉོན་མོངས་མེས་འཚིགས་པས། ། གཡོ་བའི་ལོངས་
སྤྱོད་ཐལ་བའི་མྱུ་གུ་འཁྲུངས། ། སྙིང་པོ་མེད་པས་བསོད་ནམས་འབྲས་བུ་བརླག།
སྲིད་པའི་བདེ་བ་རྒུད་པའི་མཐའ་ཅན་ཏེ། ། ཡུན་རིང་འབྱོར་ཀྱང་ནམ་ཞིག་ཅི་
ནས་ཉམས། ། གཡོ་ཞིང་མི་རྟག་བསླུ་བའི་བདག་ཉིད་ཅན། ། རྩྭར་མཚུངས་ནོར་
ལ་ཆགས་པ་བཟློག་པར་གྱིས། ། དེ་ལྟར་འོས་ཤིང་རིགས་པའི་ཚིག་གིས་བཟློག་
ཀྱང་། དེ་དག་གི་ཆགས་པ་ནི་ཡུན་རིང་པོར་གོམས་ཤིང་སྲ་བར་གྱུར་པས་རྡོ་བའི་
ཁམས་ལ་བརྐོས་པའི་རི་མོ་ལྟར་ཞི་བར་མ་གྱུར་ཏོ། ། དེ་ནས་ཕྱི་དྲོའི་དུས་ཀྱི་ཚེ།
རྒྱལ་པོ་དེའི་ཕོ་བྲང་གི་འཁོར་ན། སྦྱིན་གཏོང་གི་ཁང་པ་ཆེན་པོར་ལས་སུ་བསྐོས་
པའི་བློན་པོ་རྣམས་ཀྱིས་སྐྱེ་བོ་ཕོངས་པའི་ཚོགས་ལ་ནོར་དང་ལོངས་སྤྱོད་ཅི་འདོད་
པ་སྦྱིན་པས་དབུལ་བའི་སྡུག་བསྔལ་བཟློག་པར་བྱེད་པའི་དཔག་བསམ་གྱི་ཤིང་
ཆེན་པོ་མཐོང་ངོ་། ། དེ་མཐོང་བའི་ཚེ། ཕུ་བོ་གསུམ་ནི་ནོར་ལ་དུང་བས་སློང་མོ་
སྤྱོད་དུ་འགྲོ་བར་ཆོས་པ་ལ་གཞོན་ནུ་མཉེས་གཤིན་བཟང་པོས་སྨྲས་པ། འདི་ཅི།
སྦྱིན་པའི་ཆོས་ལ་ཁྱེད་ཅག་མི་དགའ་ན། ། ད་ཡང་སྦྱིན་བདག་ཡིད་དུ་འོང་འགྱུར་
རམ། ། སློང་བ་འོངས་ན་ཁྲོ་བ་རྒྱས་པ་རྣམས། ། ཅི་ཕྱིར་གཞན་ལ་སློང་མོ་སྤྱོད་
པར་བྱེད། ། ཅེས་སོ། དེར་ནུ་བོ་གསུམ་ནི་ལྗོན་ཤིང་ལོ་འདབ་རྒྱས་པའི་དྲུང་ན་
ཆོས་དང་ལྡན་པའི་གཏམ་གྱིས་ངལ་བསོ་ཞིང་འདུག་ལ། ཕུ་བོ་གསུམ་གྱིས་སྦྱིན་
གཏོང་གི་ཁང་པ་ག་ལ་བ་དེར་ཕྱིན་ནས་སྦྱིན་པ་བླངས་པ་དང་། ཧ་ཅང་བརྐམ་
ཞིང་ཆོག་མི་ཤེས་པས་མ་རངས་ཏེ། བློན་པོ་དག་གིས་ཡོ་བྱས་ཉུང་ཟད་ཅིག་བྱིན་
ཏེ། དེ་སྦྱིན་པ་ཆེར་མ་ཐོབ་པས་ཡིད་ཚིམ་པར་མ་གྱུར་ཏེ། བང་མཛོད་གཞན་
ཞིག་ནས་ནོར་བརྐུ་བར་བརྩམས་པ་དང་། ཆོག་མི་ཤེས་པས་རིན་པོ་ཆེའི་ཕུང་པོ་



ཁུར་གྱི་ཚད་ལས་འདས་པ་ཞིག་འཁུར་བའི་ལྗིད་ཀྱིས་ནོན་ཏེ་མྱུར་པོར་འགྲོ་བར་མ་
ནུས་པའི་ཚེ་བང་མཛོད་སྲུང་བས་ཚོར་ཏེ། གཞོན་ནུ་གསུམ་པོའི་ལག་པ་པད་མོའི་
ཆུན་པོ་ལྟར་བཅིངས་ལ། རྐང་པ་ལྕགས་སྒྲོག་གིས་བསྡམས་ཤིང་། ཉེས་བྱས་དུ་
མ་ཚོགས་པའི་ཁྲིམས་མུན་ནང་དུ་བཅུག་ནས་སྡུག་བསྔལ་བར་གནས་སོ། ། དེ་
ནས་རེ་ཞིག་མིའི་བདག་པོ་ཡུལ་འཁོར་སྐྱོང་ ཀི་ལཱ་ ཤ་དང་ མཚུངས་པའི་གཉིས་
འཐུང་གི་དབང་པོ་ལ་བཞོན་ཏེ་རྒྱལ་མཚན་དང་རྔ་གཡབ་འཛིན་པའི་བློན་པོའི་
ཚོགས་དང་བཅས་པ་ཕོ་བྲང་གི་ཕྱིར་བྱུང་ནས། སྦྱིན་གཏོང་གི་ཁང་པར་རིན་པོ་
ཆེའི་སྟེགས་བུ་ལ་འདུག་ཅིང་། བརྒྱ་བྱིན་ལྟ་བུའི་མཆོད་སྦྱིན་རབ་ཏུ་འགྱེད་པས་
སློང་བ་ཐམས་ཅད་ཚིམ་པར་བྱེད་དོ། ། དེར་པད་མ་ལྟར་ཡངས་པའི་མིག་གིས་
ཕྱོགས་སུ་བལྟས་པ་དང་། ཉེ་འཁོར་གྱི་ཤིང་གྲིབ་ན་གཞོན་ནུ་གསུམ་ཞིག་ཕོངས་
པ་ལྟར་སྣང་ཡང་། སློང་དུ་མི་འོང་བར་བརྟན་པ་དང་ལྡན་བཞིན་དུ་འདུག་པ་
མཐོང་ནས་ཐེ་ཚོམ་དང་ངོ་མཚར་དུ་གྱུར་པས་ཕོ་ཉ་བཏང་ནས་མདུན་དུ་བཀུག་སྟེ་
དྲིས་པ། རབ་ཏུ་ཕོངས་ཀྱང་སློང་ལ་མ་གོམས་པ། ། ཁྱོད་ཅག་སུ་ཞིག་ཅིའི་ཕྱིར་
འདིར་མི་འོང་། ། བདག་གི་སྦྱིན་པའང་གྲགས་ པ་མེད་གྱུར་ཏམ། ། རེ་བ་མ་
རྫོགས་སྐྱིད་ལུག་གྱུར་ཏམ་ཅི། ། དེ་དག་གིས་ཕྱག་འཚལ་ཏེ་གསོལ་བ། ལྷ་གཅིག་
ཁྱོད་ཀྱི་སྦྱིན་པའི་རྔ་ཆེན་དང་། ། བསོད་ནམས་དཔལ་གྱིས་མཐོ་བའི་རྒྱལ་མཚན་
ནི། ། སྲིད་པ་གསུམ་ན་ཉི་མ་བཞིན་དུ་གྲགས། ། དེ་ལ་སུ་ཞིག་ཡ་མཚན་སྐྱེས་མ་
གྱུར། ། འོན་ཀྱང་བདག་ཅག་དབུལ་ཕོངས་མ་ལགས་ཏེ། ། ཁྱོད་ཀྱི་དྲིན་གྱིས་
བདེ་བར་འབྱོར་ཞིང་མཆིས། ། རེ་བ་བཞིན་དུ་སློང་བའི་སྐྱེ་བོ་ལ། ། བདོག་ཀུན་
བྱིན་ནས་འདི་ལྟར་གནས་པར་གྱུར། ། དེ་སྐད་ཅེས་རྨད་དུ་བྱུང་བའི་ཚིག་དང་
སྤྱོད་པ་མཐོང་བས། རྒྱལ་པོ་ཡིད་ཤིན་ཏུ་དགའ་ཞིང་དང་བར་གྱུར་ཏེ། རང་
གིས་བགོ་བར་འོས་པའི་ལྷའི་གོས་གསེར་སྲང་བྱེ་བ་རི་བ་དག་དང་། རིན་པོ་ཆེའི་
རྒྱུན་རྣམས་བྱིན་ཅིང་། གླང་པོ་ཆེའི་ཤིང་རྟ་ལ་བཞག་ནས་ཕོ་བྲང་དམ་པའི་ནང་
དུ་ཁྲིད་དེ་སེང་གེས་བཏེགས་པའི་གསེར་གྱི་ཁྲི་ཙན་དན་དམར་པོ་ལས་བྱས་པའི་
༣༢



པས་
རས
རྐང་རྟེན་རིན་པོ་ཆེ་སྣ་ཚོགས་ཀྱིས་སྤྲས་པ། རྒྱལ་པོའི་ཁྲིར་འོས་པའི་སྟེང་དུ་སྟན་
ནང་འཚང་ཅན་ལ་གཞོན་ནུ་དག་འདུག་ཏུ་བཅུག་ནས་རོ་བརྒྱ་ལྡན་པའི་བཟའ་བ་
དང་བཏུང་བ་བཅུད་དང་ནུས་པ་ཕུན་སུམ་ཚོགས་པ་མང་པོས་བསྙེན་བཀུར་བྱས་
སོ། ། དེ་ནས་མིའི་དབང་པོས་དེ་རྣམས་ལ་དད་པའི་བཞིན་གྱིས་བལྟས་ཏེ་སྨྲས་པ།
སྐལ་བ་བཟང་ལྡན་ཟླ་རྒྱས་བཞིན་རས་ ཅན། ། ཁྱོད་ཀྱིས་བདག་གི་ཡིད་མཚོ་
དྭངས་པར་གྱུར། ། ཀུན་དགའི་ཀུ་མུད་རབ་ཏུ་རྒྱས་བྱའི་སླད། ། ལེགས་བཤད་
བསིལ་ཟེར་ ཅིས་ ཏེ་ སྤྲོ་མི་བྱེད། ། དམ་ པ་ རྣམས་ དང་ ཕྲད་ ན་ལེགས་ བཤད་
འཕེལ། ། ཡིད་གཅུགས་གྱུར་པས་ཡོན་ཏན་བརྒྱ་ཕྲག་འཐོབ། ། དེ་སླད་བདག་
ཅག་སྐལ་བ་ལྡན་བྱའི་ཕྱིར། ། ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྣང་བས་སྐྱེ་རྒུ་སྣང་བར་མཛོད། །གཞོན་
ནུ་ལེགས་པའི་བློ་གྲོས་ཀྱིས་དེ་ཐོས་ནས། གལ་ཏེ་སྙན་པའི་གཏམ་བརྗོད་པས་རྒྱལ་
པོ་འདིའི་སེམས་རངས་པར་གྱུར་ན། ཆོས་བསྟན་ནས་དགེ་ལེགས་རབ་ཏུ་འཕེལ་
བར་བྱའོ་སྙམ་ནས། དྲིལ་བུ་དང་མཚུངས་པའི་སྐད་ཕྱུང་སྟེ་ལན་གསོལ་བ། ས་
ཆེན་སྐྱོང་བ་ཁྱོད་དྲུང་དུ། ། བདག་ལྟས་སྤྱི་བརྟོལ་སྨྲ་ཅི་འཚལ། ། སྐྱེ་བོ་འདི་དག་
ཁྱོད་ཉིད་ཀྱི། ། ཡོན་ཏན་སྒྲོག་པས་བྲེལ་བར་གནས། ། དཔུང་པའི་སྟོབས་ཆེན་
ལྡན་ཁྱོད་ཀྱིས། ། ས་འདི་ཡོངས་སུ་བཟུང་གྱུར་པ། ། དཔལ་ལྡན་ཕྱོགས་ཀྱི་གླང་
པོ་ཡིས། ། རིན་ཆེན་ཤིང་རྟ་བཞིན་དུ་མཛེས། ། རིགས་ཤིང་འོས་པ་གང་གི་
བཀའ། ། ནོར་བུས་མཚན་པའི་ཅོད་པན་བཞིན། ། སྤྱི་བོས་ངེས་པར་མ་བླངས་
པའི། །ས་སྐྱོང་དེ་ནི་སུ་ཞིག་ཡོད། ། ས་གཞི་དང་ནི་ནམ་མཁའ་ལ། ། རྒྱལ་པོ་
དྲེགས་པ་ཅན་དག་དང་། །རྒྱུ་སྐར་ཚོགས་རྣམས་ཟིལ་གནོན་པ། ། ཁྱོད་དང་ཉི་
མ་རྣམ་པར་མཛེས། ། དེ་ཐོས་མ་རུངས་སྐྱེ་བོ་དང༌། ། འབྱུང་པོའི་བྱ་རྣམས་ལྷན་
ཅིག་བྲོས། ། སྐྱེ་འགྲོ་ཀུན་ གྱི་ དགེ་ལེགས་དང་། ། ཆུ་སྐྱེས་ཚལ་ནི་ མཉམ་དུ་
རྒྱུས། ། གངས་རི་རྣམས་ ཀྱིས་ ལྷུན་ པོ་དང་། ། ཆུ་ ཀླུང་རྣམས་ ཀྱིས་ རྒྱ་ མཚོ་
དང་། ། ལྗོན་ཤིང་ཚོགས་ཀྱིས་ཡོངས་འདུ་ལྟར། ། ཁྱོད་ལ་འགྲན་པར་ནུས་པ་
སུ། ། མཐུ་སྟོབས་དཔུང་ནི་མི་བཟད་པའི། ། ཤུགས་ཀྱིས་དུས་མཐའི་རླུང་བཞིན་
1:|:
511
:
324a
1 2.
9 སྒྱུ་
14



, ， ..
དུ། ། བདག་ཅག་ཡུད་ཀྱིས་འཇོམས་སོ་ཞེས། ། ཁྱོད་ཀྱི་དགྲ་རྣམས་འདར་རམ་
སྙམ། ། བསོད་ནམས་དཔལ་འབྱོར་ལེགས་རྒྱས་ ཤིང་། ། བཀའ་ཁྲིམས་བཟང་
པོའི་གྲགས་པ་ཡིས། །འཇིག་རྟེན་གསུམ་པོ་ཡོངས་བཀང་སྟེ། །ཉེས་པར་སྤྱོད་
པའི་གོ་སྐབས་འཕྲོག ། ཡོན་ཏན་གུར་ཀུམ་དོག་པ་དག ། སྦྱིན་པའི་ཆུ་ཡིས་རབ་
བརླན་ནས། ། དགེ་ལེགས་བྱེ་བའི་ཡིག་ཕྲེང་དག ། གྲགས་པའི་པིར་གྱིས་འབྲི་
བར་བྱེད། ། ནམ་མཁའ་བས་ཀྱང་ཡངས་པ་དང༌། ། ཆུ་གཏེར་བས་ཀྱང་དཔག་
པར་དཀའ། ། ལྷུན་པོ་བས་ཀྱང་བརྟན་པ་ཁྱོད། ། བརྒྱ་བྱིན་ལས་ཀྱང་རྒྱས་གྱུར་
ཅིག། དེ་ལྟར་ཤིན་ཏུ་སྙན་པའི་གཏམ་གྱིས་མིའི་བདག་པོ་རབ་ཏུ་མགུ་བར་གྱུར་
པའི་བཞིན་འཛུམ་པ་བསྟན་ནས། གཞོན་ནུས་མཚོན་ཏེ། ཀྱེ་ཀྱེ་གྲོགས་པོ་འདི་
ལྟར་མཁས་ཤིང་གསལ་བའི་བློ་གྲོས་ཅན་ཁྱོད། བདག་ལ་འདི་ཙམ་དུ་བསྔགས་པ་
གསུངས་པ་ཅི་ཞིག་བགྱི། བདག་གི་དགེ་མཚན་ཡོངས་སུ་གསལ་བར་བྱས་ཟིན་གྱི།
ད་ནི་ཆོས་དང་ལྡན་པའི་གདམས་ངག་གིས་གཙུག་ལག་གཉིས་ཀྱི་ལམ་རབ་ཏུ་སྣང་
བར་མཛོད་ཅིག ཅེས་སོ། ། དེ་ལྟར་ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྣོད་དུ་རུང་བའི་བློ་གྲོས་ཀྱི་དང་བ་
ཐོབ་པར་ཤེས་ནས་གཞོན་ནུ་ལེགས་པའི་བློ་གྲོས་ཀྱིས་སྤུན་གཉིས་ལ་སྨྲས་པ། སྲིད་
དང་ཐར་པའི་བླང་དོར་གནས། ། གཙུག་ལག་གཉིས་ཀྱིས་གསལ་བར་བྱེད། ། ཉི་
མའི་འོད་དང་ཟླ་འོད་ཀྱིས། ། ཉིན་དང་མཚན་མོ་སྣང་བྱེད་བཞིན། ། བདེན་
པར་སྨྲ་བའི་རིན་ཆེན་གྱི། ། སྐྱེས་ནི་རྒྱལ་ལ་འབུལ་བར་གྱིས། ། ས་སྐྱོང་ཆོས་ཀྱི་
འབྱོར་ལྡན་ན། ། བདག་ཅག་འབངས་རྣམས་བདེ་བར་གནས། ། དེ་ཐོས་ནས་
གཞོན་ནུ་ མཉེས་གཤིན་ བཟང་ པོས། འཇིག་ རྟེན་ ལུགས་ ཀྱི་ གཙུག་ ལག་ དང་
མཐུན་པར་ ཚོགས་ སུ་ བཅད་ དེ་ གསོལ་ བ། ལྷ་ གཅིག་ ཕོ་ བྲང་ འཁོར་ རྣམས་
དང་། ། འབྱོར་པས་ས་སྐྱོང་མཛེས་མིན་ཏེ། ། ཆོས་དང་ལྡན་པའི་བཀའ་ཁྲིམས་
ཀྱིས། ། ཡུལ་འཁོར་ལེགས་སྐྱོང་རྒྱལ་པོའི་རྒྱུན། ། རླབས་ཕྲེང་ལྦུ་བའི་དོ་ཤལ་
གྱིས། ། རྒྱ་མཚོ་ཡོན་ཏན་གནས་མ་ལགས། ། མཐའ་ཡས་གཏིང་དཔག་དཀའ་བ་
དང་། ། རིན་ཆེན་འབྱུང་གནས་གྱུར་པས་བརྗིད། ། སྦྱིན་པས་ལོངས་སྤྱོད་ལྡན་
15
1



བསམས་བ
བ བ
བ བ བ
བ བ བ
འི་
མ ཁས་
པ་དང་། ། དུལ་བས་མངོན་པར་མཐོ་བ་དང་། ། མཛངས་པར་སྨྲ་བས་རྒན་
རབས་ལྟར། ། ཆོས་བཞིན་སྤྱོད་པས་མི་དབང་མཛེས། ། བློ་གྲོས་གསལ་བའི་མེ་
ལོང་ནི། ། སྐྱོན་གྱི་གཡའ་དང་རབ་བྲལ་ནས། ། ལེགས་ཉེས་སྤྱོད་པའི་བླང་དོར་
གྱི། ། གཟུགས་བརྙན་རྣམ་ དཔྱོད་མིག་ གིས་ མཐོང་། ། ལེ་ལོ་བག་མེད་ རབ་
སྤངས་ཏེ། ། ཤེས་བཞིན་སྤྱོད་པས་རྒྱལ་སྲིད་སྐྱོང་། ། ལྷ་རྣམས་བག་མེད་གྱུར་
པའི་ཚེ། ། ཆར་ཆད་ལོ་ཐོག་བསྐམ་པར་འགྱུར། ། ཁྱོད་ལ་རེ་བའི་སྐྱེ་རྒུ་དག །
བཀའ་དྲིན་བདུད་རྩིས་མྱོས་པ་ན། །བྱས་པ་ཤེས་པའི་དབྱུ་གུ་ཡིས། ། གྲགས་
པའི་རྔ་ཆེན་རྡུང་བར་བྱེད། ། ཕྲག་དོག་ཚེར་མའི་ནགས་ཚལ་དག ། ཕྲ་མའི་
རླུང་གིས་རྣམ་བུས་ཏེ། ། ཕན་ཚུན་རྩོད་པའི་རྟ་གདོང་འབར། ། ཕན་བདེའི་ལོ་
ཏོག་སྲེག་པ་རྣམས། ། ཁྱོད་ཐུགས་མཁའ་ལྟར་སྙོམས་པ་ལ། ། རྣམ་དཔྱོད་ཆུ་
འཛིན་རབ་དཀྲིགས་ནས། ། ཐབས་ལ་མཁས་པའི་བཀའ་ཁྲིམས་ཀྱི། ། བདུད་
རྩིའི་ཆར་གྱིས་ཞི་བར་མཛོད། ། མཛའ་བའི་ཚིག་ལ་ཡིད་བརྟན་མེད་དམ་ཧ་ཅང་
ཡིད་ཆེས་སླ་བའང་སྐྱོན། ༑ གཉེན་དང་འབངས་ལ་བརྩེ་བ་མེད་དམ་ཚོད་ལས་
བརྒལ་བའི་བྱམས་ པའང་སྐྱོན། ། རིགས་ པའི་ལས་ལ་བརྩོན་པ་ དོར་རམ་མ་
བརྟག་འཆོལ་བར་སྤྱོད་པའང་སྐྱོན། ། མི་འགྲུབ་བཞིན་དུ་སྨྲ་བ་བྱེད་དམ་སྨྲས་
བཞིན་མི་སྒྲུབ་དེ་ཡང་སྐྱོན། ། མ་བསམས་ཚིག་དང་མ་བསྡམས་སྤྱོད་པ་ཁེངས་
དང་གཡོ་སྒྱུའང་སྐྱོན་དུ་གནས། ། དེ་ལྟའི་སྐྱོན་གྱི་དྲི་མ་བྲལ་ཞིང་འཇིག་རྟེན་སྐྱོན་
ཡོང་གསལ་བར་མཛོད། ། ཡོན་ཏན་ལྡན་དང་ཕ་མ་དྲིན་ཆེན་རྒན་རབ་མགྲོན་
ལའང་བཀུར་སྟི་བྱ། ། ཡོན་ཏན་མེད་དང་དབུལ་ཕོངས་ནད་པ་ཉམ་ཐག་དགྲ་
ལའང་བརྙས་པ་སྤང་། ། ཡོན་ཏན་འཛིན་པས་ངོམས་པ་མེད་ཅིང་གཙུག་ལག་
གཞུང་ལུགས་སྤེལ་ལ་བརྩོན། ། ཡོན་ཏན་མཆོག་ལ་འགྲོ་ཀུན་འགོད་ཅིང་ཞི་ཞིང་
དུལ་ལ་སྙན་པར་སྨྲ། ། དེ་ལྟར་སྤྱད་ན་ཁྱོད་དང་འབངས་རྣམས་གནོད་པ་ཀུན་
ལས་རྣམ་གྲོལ་ཞིང༌། ། བསོད་ནམས་དཔལ་འབྱོར་ཕྱོགས་བཅུར་རྒྱས་པ་རྫོགས་
ལྡན་དུས་དང་མཚུངས་པར་འགྱུར། ། དེའི་རྗེས་སུ་གཞོན་ནུ་དགེ་བ་ཅན་གྱིས་
མ
16
ན་བ་



རྒྱལ་པོའི་རིགས་དང་མཐུན་པའི་ཆོས་ཀྱི་གཙུག་ལག་ཚིགས་སུ་བཅད་དེ་གསོལ་བ།
རྒྱལ་སྲིད་ཁང་བཟང་འདི་ལ་ནི། ། ལེགས་ཉེས་སྤྱོད་པའི་ཐེམ་སྐས་ལས། ། ཐར་
པའི་གྲོང་དུ་འཛེགས་པ་དང་། ། ངན་འགྲོའི་དོང་དུ་འབབ་པའང་ཡོད། ། གཡོ་
ཞིང་མི་རྟག་ལོངས་སྤྱོད་ཀྱིས། ། སྔོན་གྱི་ལེགས་བྱས་ཟད་གྱུར་ཅིང་། །གྲགས་
དང་སྲིད་ཕྱིར་མི་བཟད་པའི། ། སྡིག་པ་བསགས་ཏེ་དམྱལ་བར་ལྷུང་། ། ཆོས་
ཕྱིར་འབྱོར་པ་ཡོངས་བཏང་ཞིང་། ། འདོད་སྲེད་ངན་གཡོ་ཡོངས་སྤངས་ནས། །
རླབས་ཆེན་དགེ་བ་རབ་སྤྱད་པས། ། བསོད་ནམས་མྱུར་རྫོགས་མཐོ་རིས་འགྲོ། །
དེས་ན་སྡིག་པ་ཤིན་ཏུ་སྤང་། ། བསྟན་དང་འགྲོ་བའི་ཕན་བདེ་སྤེལ། ། འདི་དང་
ཕྱི་མའི་དོན་འགྲུབ་ཅིང་། ། སྲིད་དང་ཞི་བའི་དཔལ་འཐོབ་འགྱུར། ། རྟག་ཏུ་
དད་པས་ དཀོན་ མཆོག་ མཆོད་ ཅིང་ སྦྱིན་ པས་ དབུལ་ ཕོངས་ཚིམ་ པར་བྱ། །
འབངས་རྣམས་དགེ་བཅུའི་ཚུལ་ལ་འགོད་ཅིང་བྱམས་དང་སྙིང་རྗེས་གཞན་ཕན་
སྒྲུབ། ། སྡིག་དང་གཡོ་སྒྱུ་ངན་སྤྱོད་སྤོང་ཞིང་ཁྲོ་དང་ང་རྒྱལ་ཞི་བར་གནས། །དེ་
ལྟར་སྤྱད་ན་རྒྱལ་སྲིད་བདེ་ཞིང་མཐོ་རིས་དཔལ་དང་ཐར་པ་འགྲུབ། །ཡང་ན་
བསླུ་ཞིང་མི་རྟག་པའི། ། རྒྱལ་སྲིད་སྙིང་པོ་མེད་འདིས་ཅི། ། ནགས་སུ་གཅིག་
པུར་གནས་ནས་ཀྱང་། ། རྩེ་གཅིག་བྱང་ཆུབ་བསྒྲུབ་པར་རིགས། ། དེ་ལྟར་ཕན་
པ་དང་གྲོལ་བའི་ཚིག་དེ་དག་ཐོས་ནས་རྒྱལ་པོའི་ཡིད་དགའ་བ་དང་ངོ་མཚར་བ་
འགྲན་པ་ལྟར་བཞིན་རྒྱས་པར་གྱུར་ནས་འཛུམ་དམུལ་ཏེ་སྨྲས་པ། གྲོགས་པོ་དག་
གི་བདེན་པའི་ཚིག ། བདག་གི་ཡིད་མཚོ་དྭངས་བར་ནི། ། ངང་མོ་བཞིན་དུ་
འཇུག་པ་དང༌། ། ཆུ་ཀླུང་བཞིན་དུ་འབབ་པར་གྱུར། ། བདུད་རྩིའི་ཟས་ལ་སུ་མི་
སྲེད། ། ལེགས་པར་བཤད་པ་སུ་མི་ལེན། ། ནོར་གྱི་སྐྱེས་ནི་རབ་མང་ཡང་། །
ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྐྱེས་དང་འཕྲད་པ་དཀོན། ། གཙུག་ལག་ཡོན་དུ་བདག་གི་སྲིད། ། ཁྱོད་
དང་ལྷན་ཅིག་སྤྱད་པར་བགྱི། ། ཀུན་དགའི་གཏམ་གྱིས་ཕྱི་ནས་ཀྱང༌། ། བདག་
ཅག་སྐལ་བ་རྫོགས་པར་མཛོད། ། ཅེས་སོ། སྐབས་དེར་གཞོན་ནུ་མཉེས་གཤིན་
བཟང་པོ་སྤུན་ལ་བརྩེ་བས་ཕྱི་རོལ་དུ་བྱུང་སྟེ། ཕུ་བོ་དག་གར་སོང་ཞེས་དྲིས་པ་ན།



8
::
1:|
:s
tr
a
tauss
s:/+
Es:43E
!
-
-s
:
:
!
!:
Uss
•
I
-
རིན31:"
"
-
43
L
,
4
དེ་ལྟར་ཉམས་ཉེས་པར་གྱུར་པ་མཐོང་ནས་ཡིད་མི་དགའ་བཞིན་དུ་ནང་དུ་ཞུགས་
ཏེ། བཞིན་འཛུམ་པ་དང་བྲལ་བས་སྟན་ལ་འདུག་པ་དང་། རྒྱལ་པོས་དེ་ལ་དྲིས་
པ། འདི་ཅི་དགའ་བར་བྱ་བའི་གནས་སྐབས་སུ། དེ་དེ་ལྟར་ཡིད་མི་བདེ་ཞིང་
འདུག དེས་ཇི་ལྟར་གྱུར་པ་ཞིབ་ཏུ་གསོལ་བ་དང་། རྒྱལ་པོས་གཞོན་ནུ་ལེགས་
པའི་བློ་གྲོས་ཀྱིས་མཚོན་ཏེ་གྲོགས་པོ་དམ་པ་ཡོན་ཏན་མཆོག་ཏུ་གྱུར་པ་ཁྱེད་ཅག་
ལའང་དེ་ལྟའི་ངང་ཚུལ་ངན་པ་ཅན་གྱི་སྤུན་ཟླ་ཡོད་དམ། དེས་གསོལ་བ། ལྷ་དེ་
ལྟ་བུ་ ཤིན་ ཏུའང་ མཆིས་ པ་ལགས་ སོ། འདོད་ལ་སྲེད་ ཅིང་ མི་ བསྲུན་བློ་ གྲོས་
རྨོངས། ། ངན་སྤྱོད་བརྒྱ་ལྡན་ཕུ་བོ་གསུམ་ཞིག་མཆིས། ། བདག་གིས་འབད་
བརྒྱུས་འཆོས་པར་མ་ནུས་ཏེ། ། ཐུར་ལ་འབབ་པའི་ཆུ་རྒྱུན་དྲག་པོ་བཞིན། །
འོན་ཀྱང་རང་གི་ཉེས་པས་བཅོམ་རྣམས་ལ། ། བཟོད་ན་ལེགས་ཀྱི་ནན་ཏུར་ཅི་
ཞིག་འཚལ། ། ཁྱོད་ཀྱི་གྲགས་དང་བསོད་ནམས་སྤེལ་བའི་སླད། ། ཉེས་བྱས་
ཚོགས་རྣམས་བཅིངས་ལས་གྲོལ་བར་མཛོད། ། རྒྱལ་པོས་སྨྲས་པ། སྐྱེས་བུ་དམ་
པ་གང་གི་གྲིབ་མའང་འགོང་བར་མི་རིགས་པ། ཁྱེད་ཅག་གི་སྤུན་ཟླར་གྱུར་པ་ལ་
སུ་ཞིག་གནོད་པར་བགྱི། འདི་ཉིད་དུ་བཙོན་དུ་བཟུང་བ་ཐམས་ཅད་དང་བཅས་
པ་བཏང་བར་བགྱིའོ། ཞེས་ སོ། ། དེ་ནས་རྒྱལ་པོའི་བཀའ་བཞིན་དུ་བློན་པོ་
རྣམས་ཀྱིས་བཙོན་ར་དག་ཏུ་མི་འཇིགས་པའི་སྒྲ་བསྒྲགས་ཏེ་བཙོན་པ་བརྒྱ་ཕྲག་
མང་པོ་བཅིངས་པ་ལས་གྲོལ་ནས། དགའ་བའི་གཏམ་གྱིས་ས་གཞི་གང་བར་བྱས་
ལ། ཕུ་བོ་གསུམ་ཡང་ཕོ་བྲང་གི་ནང་དུ་བོས་ཏེ། གཞོན་ནུ་འདོད་ལྷའི་བུ་ནི་རྒྱལ་
པོའི་རོལ་མོ་མཁན་བྱེད་དུ་བཅུག དྲག་པོ་ནི་ཆབ་སྒོ་བར་བསྐོས། མུན་པ་ཅན་
ཡང་སྐྱེད་ཚལ་སྲུང་དུ་བཅུག་གོ ། བདག་ཉིད་ཆེན་པོ་དེ་དག་རྒྱལ་པོའི་བཀས་
ཉིན་ཞག་དུ་མར་དེ་ཉིད་དུ་འདུག་སྟེ་ལུགས་ཀྱི་བསྟན་བཅོས་དང༌། རིག་པའི་
གནས་དང་། བརྟག་པའི་རིག་བྱེད་བཅོ་བརྒྱད་ལ་སོགས་པ་བསྟན་ཅིང༌། ཡན་
ལག་བརྒྱད་པའི་གསོ་སྦྱོང་ལའང་ཉེ་བར་བཀོད་དེ། རྒྱལ་པོ་འཁོར་དང་བཅས་པ་
ཐམས་ཅད་ཚིམ་པར་བྱས་ནས་མཆོད་པ་དང་བཀུར་སྟི་ཆེར་བྱས་ཏེ། གཞོན་ནུ་དེ་



པར་བྱའོ། ། རབ་ཏུ་བྱེད་པ་གཉིས་པའོ། ། ། །
དང་མི་འཇིགས་པའི་སྦྱིན་པས་འགྲོ་བ་ལ་ཕན་འདོགས་པ་ཡིན་ནོ་ཞེས་ཀྱང་བརྗོད་
ཡོན་ཏན་ལ་བསྔགས་པ་དང་། བདག་ཉིད་ཆེན་པོ་རྣམས་ནི་ཟང་ཟིང་དང་ཆོས་
ནི་འབྱོར་པ་མི་ཐོབ་ཅིང་རྒུད་པའི་རང་བཞིན་ནོ་ཞེས་བྱ་བ་དང་། ཆོག་ཤེས་པའི་
འགྲོ་བ་འདིར་སྐྱེ་བའི་སྡུག་བསྔལ་ནི་ཤིན་ཏུ་འཇིགས་སུ་རུང་བ་དང་། འདོད་པ་
དཔལ་གྱུར་སྦྱིན་པའི་དཔག་བསམ་ཤིང་དེ་ཨེ་མ་བསྔགས་པར་འོས། ། དེ་ལྟར་
སྨིན་ཅི་འདོད་རིན་ཆེན་སྦྱིན་པས་སྐྱེ་རྒུའི་ཕོངས་པ་སེལ། ། སྐལ་བཟང་སུམ་རྩེན་
གྲིབ་བསིལ་ཡངས་པས་ཉོན་མོངས་གདུང་བ་སྐྱོབ། ། ལེགས་བྱས་འབྲས་བུ་རབ་
རབ་རྒྱས་ཆོག་ཤེས་འདབ་ཕྲེང་མཛེས། ། བློ་གྲོས་མེ་ཏོག་རྣམ་བཀྲ་ཕན་བདེའི་
དག་རང་གི་གནས་སུ་སོང་ངོ༌། སྙིང་སྟོབས་རྩ་བ་བརྟན་ཅིང་གཏོང་ཕོད་ཡལ་ག་
sirine
raire+jra
v
+
::
དgujx @
vespda
s
gny
:
gsag#
*ag1
ibe
:
4::
: པལསjsg4g
1:1:31:|:#**# 81: +449 7 11
: ༧ , ཝ6,ཙ%84%ཀ.ssf; ༤ པt.iacs ** ཐརྩaཐi! ཐ arst+-༧.གཙ-
la, 1:|:#gts
: 1:|:
1:ugjp-greinerei+i2%rs: 12:
མཎ ཏུ ལ པ happ
#ttpstit=say %
-
, :g1:# #
a
s
པ ཨ6/#t s++++5+ v4kr$$g=sv
-པཎཐཐཏ%i; ,
དག བསྶ ཏཱབྷ stuhr s: *



ཟ 1:ཀ་༩ཀ །ཁ་ཟས་ལ་
"པrsཀ
ཀན་
རབ་བྱེད་གསུམ་པ་ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས་ཀྱི་
ཡོན་ཏན་ལ་བསྔགས་པ།
དེ་ནས་རིམ་གྱིས་དབྱར་གྱི་དུས་སུ་གྱུར་ཏེ། འབིགས་བྱེད་གནའ་མས་ཉེ་
བར་འཁྱུད་པ་ཡིས། ། དབྱར་གྱི་དུས་འདི་ཅི་ཡང་སྲེད་ལྡན་གྱུར། ། ལང་ཚོ་ཅན་
དང་འདོད་ པས་ མྱོས་ རྣམས་ ལ། ། བྱེད་ པོས་ རྩེ་ དགའི་ གོ་ སྐབས་ འབྱེད་ པ་
བཞིན། ། ས་གཞི་རྩྭ་འཇམ་གསར་པས་ཁེབས་པ་དག ། བསེར་བུས་གཡོས་པའི་
རི་མོ་རབ་སྣང་བ། ། རླབས་ཀྱི་ཕྲེང་བས་ཉེ་བར་དཀྲིགས་པ་ཡི། ། ཡིད་བཞིན་
མཚོ་ལ་མཛེས་པ་འགྲན་པ་བཞིན། ། མེ་ཏོག་དཀར་པོས་ཁེབས་པའི་ཆུ་གཏེར་
ནི། ། ཨིན་ཌ་རྙིལ་ལྟར་སྔོ་ཞིང་རབ་དྭངས་བ། ། ཆུ་འཛིན་གཞོན་ནུའི་དོ་ཤལ་
མཛེས་ལྡན་པའི། ། སྔོ་བསངས་ནམ་མཁའི་བུ་མོའི་རྗེས་སུ་འགྲོ། ། ཡངས་ཤིང་
དྲི་མེད་རྡུལ་ དང་ བྲལ་ བའི་ མཁའ། ། རྒྱུ་ སྐར་ ཚོགས་ ཀྱིས་ རྣམ་ པར་ བཀྲ་ བ་
ཅན། ། གྲོང་གི་ཕྲེང་བས་རབ་ཏུ་གང་བ་ཡི། ། ནོར་འཛིན་གཞི་ཡི་མཛེས་པ་
གསལ་བྱེད་བཞིན། ། དབྱར་གྱི་ཚ་ཟེར་རྣོ་ཞིང་འབར་བ་ཡིས། ། ནམ་མཁའི་
མར་གད་བཞུ་བ་གཟགས་པ་ལྟར། ། བར་སྣང་བཀང་བའི་བདུད་རྩིའི་ཆར་རྒྱུན་
གྱིས། ། ཆུ་ གཏེར་གོས་ ཅན་རྡུལ་དང་བྲལ་བར་བྱས། ། རབ་ གསལ་ གློག་གི་
གསེར་ཕྲེང་གཡོ་བ་ཅན། ། བདུད་རྩིས་རབ་མྱོས་ཆུ་འཛིན་གཞོན་ནུ་དག །
འབྲུག་སྒྲ་སྙན་པའི་རྒྱུད་མངས་སྒྲོག་པའི་ཚེ། ། ཀུན་དགའ་རྒྱས་པའི་རྨ་བྱས་གར་
ཡང་བྱེད། ། དྭངས་ཤིང་གསལ་བའི་ཁྲུས་ཀྱི་རྫིང་བུ་རྣམས། །དྲེགས་པས་མྱོས་
པའི་གཉིས་འཐུང་རྣམས་ཀྱིས་གང་། ། ཆར་སྤྲིན་སྔོན་པོ་འཁྲུགས་པས་རྣམ་རྒྱས་
པའི། ། རྒྱུ་སྐར་ལམ་དང་འགྲན་པ་བཞིན་དུ་གྱུར། ། སྔོ་ལྗང་གོས་ཀྱི་ལེགས་
གཡོགས་མེ་ཏོག་ཕྲེང་བས་རྣམ་སྨྲས་ནོར་འཛིན་དགའ་མ་ཅན། ། ལྟ་ན་ཡིད་འོང་
གཟུགས་ལྡན་ལོ་འདབ་ནོར་གྱིས་ཕྱུག་པའི་འཁྲི་ཤིང་གཞོན་ནུ་དག ། བསེར་བུའི་
ག
ཀ༌ལཱA1+88.4xin/444hsfrb+9* 14is!jeff_Mxhb#***#/༥ ཆ, f, +༩#'', *#fi;rifs?fafiifw%94%97+%rati*#*hapf3%**%879#st*# #*#
**#;3#*#*#}8x?%#f288&#*#*#ཐ4 *##76#*#****#*#*#hi
j leqjpgte#%il: 11892' :: 1:49:28@g: !res!s:41:41:49ag#38:44::
:16:33}}9897}}A#:3%83gs!
Afg9



པོ་ནི། ། ལྤ་ བའི་ ཁྱོན་དང༌ མཉམ་ དུ་ རྒྱུས། ། སྔོན་ གྱི་ ལེགས་ བྱས་ ས་ བོན་
བའི་མེ་ལོང་ནི། ། རྣམ་དཔྱོད་བློ་དང་ལྷན་ཅིག་ཉམས། ། རྒས་པའི་ཟུག་རྔུ་དྲག་
པའི་ལུས། ། ཡི་དྭགས་གཟུགས་ལ་འགྲན་འདོད་བཞིན། ། འདྲེན་བྱེད་གསལ་
གནག་པ་ཡི། ། མུན་པས་མཚན་མོ་སྐྱེངས་བྱས་ནས། ། རིད་ཅིང་མི་སྡུག་གྱུར་
སྤྱི་བོར་བཀོད་པ་བཞིན། ། གཞོན་ནུ་དགེ་བ་ཅན་གྱིས་སྨྲས་པ། འདི་ཡི་ཁ་དོག་
བཏབ། ། གསོད་སར་འཁྲིད་ཕྱིར་གསོད་རྟགས་མེ་ཏོག་གི། ། ཕྲེང་བ་དཀར་པོ་
ཉེས་པར་སྤྱད་པའི་རྣམ་ གྲངས་དག ། ལས་ཀྱི་གཤིན་རྗེས་ གདོང་ལ་རི་མོར་
ནང་དུ་བྲོས་ཏེ་སྒྲིབ་བཞིན་ལྟ། ། སོ་རྣམས་ཕྱི་རུ་བྱུང་སྟེ་འབྲོས་པ་འདྲ། ། རང་གི་
མི་སྡུག་གྱུར་པ་དང༌། ། རོ་འཛིན་ཟས་ཀྱི་རྩོམ་པ་བྲལ་རིག་ནས། ། འདྲེན་བྱེད་
བཅིངས། ། གཉེར་མའི་དྲ་བས་རྩ་ཡང་བཅིངས་པ་བཞིན། ། ཡུལ་གྱི་དངོས་པོ་
ནགས་ཚལ་ལུས་ལ་བྱུགས་པ་བཞིན། ། རྩ་ ཡི་ ཞིགས་ པས་ རྒད་པོའི་ ཡན་ལག་
ཐར་པ་དེ་ལྟ་མིན། ། ལུས་མདངས་གོས་དཀར་སྐྲ་ཡིས་ཕྲོགས་ཏེ་གྱོན། ། སྐུ་ཡི་
ཚུལ་དཀར་བ་མིན། ། ལུས་ཉམ་ཆུང་གི་སྡིག་པ་ཉམ་ཆུང་མིན། ། འཆི་བར་ཉེ་ཡི་
འདི་ལྟ་སྟེ། རྒད་པོ་དབྱུག་པ་ལ་བརྟེན་ཆོས་ལ་མིན། ། མགོ་སྐྱེས་དཀར་གྱི་ལས་
བཟད་པ་འདི་ལ་གཟིགས། ཀྱི་ཧུད་རྒད་པོའི་སྡུག་བསྔལ་ནི་བཟོད་པར་དཀའོ།
མཆི་མས་འགག་བཞིན་དུ་སྨྲས་པ། ཀྱེ་མ། རྒས་པར་གྱུར་པའི་སྡུག་བསྔལ་མི་
ཁུར་གྱིས་ཡིད་སྡུག་ཆེན་པོས་རབ་ཏུ་ནོན་ཏེ་བསྐྱོད་མི་ནུས་པ་ལྟར་གྱུར་ནས་མིག་
འགྲན་པ་ལྟ་བུ་ཞིག་འདུག་གོ ། དེ་མཐོང་བས་མཉེས་གཤིན་བཟང་པོ་སྙིང་རྗེའི་
མི་བཟད་པའི་ཁུར་གྱིས་ཆེས་དུབ་པ། ལུས་མི་སྡུག་ཅིང་ཉམ་ཆུང་བ་ཡི་དྭགས་ལ་
བའི་རྩིག་པ་ཞིག་གི་དྲུང་ན་སྐྱེས་བུ་སྐྱེས་ནས་ལོ་བརྒྱ་ལོན་པ་རྒས་པའི་སྡུག་བསྔལ་
རང་གི་ཁང་པ་ནས་ཕྱིར་བྱུང་སྟེ་ལྷོ་ཕྱོགས་སུ་འགྲོ་བར་ཆས་པ་དང༌། ལམ་དང་ཉེ་
དེ་ལྟར་གྱུར་པའི་ཚེ་གཞོན་ནུ་དེ་དག་ཡུལ་གྱི་བདེ་བ་སོ་མ་བསྟེན་པར་འདོད་ནས།
བའི་ན་ཆུང་རྣམས་ནི་དགའ་བའི་གླུ་ཡིས་རྣམ་རོལ་ཅིར་ཡང་རབ་དགར་གྱུར། །
རྫ་རྔས་བསྐུལ་ཚེ་གཡོ་བའི་བྲོ་གར་བསྒྱུར་བའི་རྩེ་གར་སེམས་གཡེངས་པ། ། བུང་
དཔེ
=ty++As
u
#*#*#krit:Fiihrer, eir
g+
tt:
བ
x
: *#**%E1/zyparatstsi+
y
t
-ja
*A%grkhr
-
s
ittet
+4+4/8ar:
:rit
44?
::|:4r#.se111*#,rery
A
=eht
easte4b3%83j4
a
34ttp:
rritཏ1#*
t e=
:
3
*
1
*
:
; ཏཏྠ
:
+--4, +f+++ALT+
, ཡ ར ཏི
ཏཾ བ བ ར བ at•l 4 - ཝi di? -i-
wil :
# #
#1
༈ri/ihnistrfiirhtiFA
484 +s rabs
*#3+r#* དrs, ++++» ༧
t-jདྷཏྟཾ
ཀྐ ༈
=
# %
t+++++%ས མ* ཆ



རྣམས། ། ཚེ་ཡི་ཚད་དང་ལྷན་ཅིག་ཟད། ། ན་དང་འཆི་བའི་སྡུག་བསྔལ་དག །
སྡིག་པའི་ཁུར་དང་མཉམ་དུ་ལྷུང་། ། སྲ་ཞིང་རྩུབ་པའི་པགས་པ་ནི། ། ནང་གི་
སེམས་དང་མཚུངས་པར་གྱུར། ། ལུས་དང་སྙིང་སྟོབས་རབ་དམན་པ། ། དགེ་
བའི་མཐུ་ཡང་དེ་བཞིན་ནོ། ། གཞོན་ནུ་ལེགས་པའི་བློ་གྲོས་ཀྱིས། སྐྱེ་འགྲོ་ཐམས་
ཅད་རྒས་པའི་སྡུག་བསྔལ་ལས་མ་འདས་པར་བསྟན་པའི་ཕྱིར་ཚིགས་སུ་བཅད་དེ་
སྨྲས་པ། རྒ་བ་ཞེས་བྱ་ལུས་ཅན་གྱི། །རྒུད་པ་ཀུན་གྱི་མཆོག་འདིས་ནི། ། སྲིན་
པོ་བཞིན་དུ་དོགས་མེད་པར། ། བློ་དང་ལང་ཚོ་མ་ལུས་འཇོམས། ། དར་ལ་
བབས་ཚེ་ཁུར་རྣམས་འཛིན་བཟོད་བྱིན་པ་ཟུང་འདིས་རྒས་པོ་རང་གི་ལུས་ཀྱང་
འཁུར་ནུས་མིན། ། སྐྱེ་བོ་རྣམས་ཀྱི་ཡིད་རབ་འཕྲོག་བྱེད་མཛེས་པའི་ལུས་ཀྱང་མི་
སྡུག་གྱུར་པས་བདག་ཉིད་སུན་འབྱིན་གྱུར། ། དགའ་མའི་ཡན་ལག་མཆོག་ཏུ་ཕྲ་
ཞིང་དཀར་གསལ་འཇམ་པའང་སོག་ལེ་ལྟར་རྩུབ་སོལ་བའི་ཁ་དོག་འཛིན། །
ཀུན་རྟོག་མང་པོས་གཞན་གྱི་ལས་ལ་འཇུག་བྱེད་བློ་ཡང་བདག་ཉིད་སྤྱོད་པའི་བླང་
དོར་གནས་མི་ཤེས། ། དེ་ལྟར་རྒས་པའི་ཆོམ་རྐུན་གྱིས། ། ལང་ཚོ་འཕྲོག་པར་མ་
གྱུར་པ༑ ༑ དེ་སྲིད་བདག་གི་དོན་ལ་ནི། ། རང་དབང་ཡོད་བཞིན་བསྒྲུབ་པར་
རིགས། ། དེ་སྐད་སྨྲས་ནས་རིམ་གྱིས་སྐྱེད་མོས་ཚལ་ཡིད་དུ་འོང་བ། རྩྭའི་མྱུ་གུ་
གསར་དུ་འཁྲུངས་པས་ནི་ས་གཞི་བཀབ་པ་བཞིན་དུ་འདུག མེ་ཏོག་རྣམ་པར་
བཀྲ་བ་མང་པོ་ནི་འབར། ལོ་འདབ་རབ་ཏུ་ རྒྱས་པའི་ལྗོན་ཤིང་རྣམས་ཀྱིས་ནི་
གང༌། བུང་བ་མང་པོའི་གླུ་སྙན་པ་ནི་བྱིས་པས་བསྒྱུར་བའི་གླིང་བུ་དང་འགྲོན་པ་
བཞིན་དུ་བྱེད་པ་རྣམས་སུ་རབ་ཏུ་རྒྱུ་ཞིང་སོང་སོང་བ་ལས། ཤིང་མྱ་ངན་མེད་
པའི་བསྟི་གནས་ཤིན་ཏུ་བསིལ་ཞིང་ཉམས་དགའ་བ་ཞིག་ན། ལྷའི་བུ་མོ་ལ་འགྲན་
པ་ལྟ་བུའི་བུད་མེད་ལང་ཚོ་རབ་ཏུ་རྒྱས་ཤིང་ལྟ་ན་སྡུག་པ་ཟླ་བའི་མེ་ལོང་གསར་པ་
སྨྲ་ཤེས་པ་འདྲ་བ་གཅིག་རྒྱུད་མངས་ཤིན་ཏུ་སྙན་པ་སྒྲེང་ཞིང་། ཀུན་ཏུ་དགའ་
བའི་གླུ་ལེན་ལ་འབངས་མོ་དང་བཅས་པ་རྩེ་ཞིང་འདུས་པ་མཐོང་ངོ་། །དེ་མཐོང་
ནས་གཞོན་ནུ་འདོད་ལྷའི་བུ་ཆགས་པའི་སྟོབས་ཀྱིས་ཡིད་རབ་ཏུ་ཕྲོགས་ཏེ་སྨྲས་པ།
གagAAhwashvཎའttཆད ༣%A1%AF%N•%wJrafsd: ད 4,144A1%8%*
*%2+༩ཀ**#**:༤:༣ f:
ཨཔྤཡྻསgs ##ay:#ever:*##*1 A#*91-1tg**7:4%#*#/#48y4#txFep
%8》**#w%8:༤ ཀོ
gyw》we
8 f43=482?qt#*#*14/1:/%f%
AR#7**
#t;$1474#ti#3344
3
2
/8328924@
f299%E2
1642སྐུ
༡!
]
37???f=119328/
%9
+3GQji
?
a
in.
73
9 INPRIA/t1%8%
****#/RF%E1%Bxiiiiii
iif fR**#*#*#*#*#igi-g**
#PSHihf7i?ifi18**#*li*#*iifth**i*ii



འདི་ཅི་ ཟླ་ བའི་ ཐིག་ལེ་ གསར་ དང་ པད་ དཀར་ གཞོན་ནུའམ་ ཆུ་ ཤེལ་ནོར་བུ་
ཡིན། ། གལ་ཏེ་རྒྱུ་སྐར་བདག་པོ་ཡིན་ན་ཉིན་མོ་ཡང་ནི་ཀུ་མུད་རྒྱས་པར་བྱེད། །
གལ་ཏེ་ཆུ་ སྐྱེས་ གསར་ པ་ ཡིན་ ན་ མཚན་ མོའང་ གེ་ སར་ འདབ་ ཕྲེང་ ཟུམ་ མི་
འགྱུར། །གལ་ཏེ་ནོར་བུའི་ཕྲེང་བ་ཡིན་ན་བདུད་རྩིས་རྟ་གདོང་ཡང་ནི་བསིལ་
བར་ནུས། ། གཞོན་ནུ་ལེགས་པའི་བློ་གྲོས་ཀྱིས། དེའི་ཆགས་པ་བཟློག་པའི་ཕྱིར་
སྨྲས་པ། སྣ་ཚོགས་རྒྱན་གྱིས་སྤུད་འདི་རིན་ཆེན་བཀོད་མཛེས་མཆོད་སྡོང་མ་ཡིན་
སྐྱེ་འགྲོ་བསླུ་བའི་སྒྱུ་མ་ཡིན། ། པགས་ པའི་ མདོག་དཀར་གསལ་འདི་རི་བོང་
འཛིན་ པའི་ ཟེར་ ཕྲེང་མིན་ གྱི་འདོད་ལྡན་སྲེག་པའི་མེ་དཔུང་ཉིད། ། མཐོན་
མཐིང་འཁྱིལ་བའི་ལན་བུ་ཨུཏྤལ་རྒྱུས་པའི་འདབ་ཕྲེང་མིན་གྱི་ཆགས་ཅན་འཆིང་
བའི་ཞགས་པ་འོ། ། སྐེད་ངོས་ཕྲ་ཞིང་མཛེས་པ་དཔག་བསམ་ཤིང་གི་རྐང་འཐུང་
མ་ལགས་ཐར་པའི་སྲོག་གཅོད་རལ་གྲི་འོ། ། གཞོན་ནུ་དགེ་བ་ཅན་གྱིས་སྨྲས་པ།
སྐྱོན་གྱི་ཡལ་འདབ་རབ་རྒྱས་ཤིང་། ། ཕྲག་དོག་ཚེར་མས་གདུང་བྱེད་པ། ། བུད་
མེད་ཤལ་མ་ལི་ཤིང་ལ། ། ཆགས་ཅན་སྤྲེའུས་འཁྱུད་པར་བྱེད། ། རེས་འགའ་
པད་མ་བས་ཀྱང་འཇམ། ། ལ་ལ་སོག་ལེ་བས་ཀྱང་རྩུབ། ། སྨིག་རྒྱུ་བས་ཀྱང་གྱ་གྱུ་
མང་། ། འབབ་ཆུ་ བས་ ཀྱང་ ཐུར་ དུ་ རྒྱུག ། བུད་ མེད་ རྣམས་ ནི་ དུག་ སྦྲུལ་
བཞིན། ། དང་པོ་མཐོང་བས་ གདུང་བ་འབར། ། རེག་ན་ མི་ བཟད་ཟུག་རྡུ་
བསྐྱེད། ། འགྲོགས་པས་ཕྲལ་དུ་འཇོམས་པར་བྱེད། །རུས་པའི་ཀ་བ་རབ་རྒྱས་
ཤིང་། ། རྩ་དང་ རྒྱུས་པའི་དྲ་བས་སྦྲེལ། ། ཤ་ཁྲག་བཤང་གཅིའི་འདམ་གྱིས་
བྱུགས། ། ལུས་ཀྱི་ཁང་རུལ་འདིས་ཅི་རུང་། ། དུར་ཁྲོད་རྣམས་ཀྱི་རོ་དང་ནི། །
སྲོག་ལས་ཁྱད་པར་གཞན་མེད་ཅིང༌། ། སྲོག་ནི་དབང་པོའི་ཡུལ་མིན་ན། ། ཀེང་
རུས་འདི་ལ་ ཅི་ཕྱིར་ཆགས། ། སྲེད་པའི་འདམ་གྱིས་གོས་ པ་ནི། ། མཁས་པ་
རྣམས་ཀྱིས་སྨད་པའི་གནས། ། བསླུ་ཞིང་མི་བསྲུན་བུད་མེད་ལ། ། ཁྱེད་ཅག་
ཆགས་པ་རབ་ཏུ་ཐོངས། ། དེ་ལྟར་ཕན་པའི་ཚིག་གི་ལྕགས་ཀྱུས་ཀྱང་འདོད་པས་
མྱོས་པའི་གླང་པོ་འདུལ་བར་མ་ནུས་ཏེ། སྲིད་པའི་ཆུ་གཏེར་དུ་འཇུག་པ་བཞིན་
23



དུ་ཕུ་བོ་གསུམ་བུད་མེད་དེ་ག་ལ་བ་དེར་སོང་ངོ༌། ། དེར་ཡང་གཞོན་ནུ་དྲག་པོ་
དང་མུན་པ་ཅན་འཁྲི་ཤིང་གི་ཕག་ཏུ་འདུག་ཏུ་བཅུག་ནས། འདོད་ལྷའི་བུས་དེ་
དང་ཉེ་བར་ཕྱིན་ཏོ། ལས་ཀྱི་ལྕགས་ཀྱུས་བཀུག་པ་བཞིན། ། ལུས་མེད་ལུས་ཅན་
དེ་འོངས་ཏེ། །དཔལ་མོ་ཆགས་པ་རྣམ་པར་འཕེལ། ། ཟླ་ཟེར་ཀུན་ད་འཕྲད་པ་
བཞིན། ། ཡིད་སྲུབས་གཟུགས་ཅན་དེ་མཐོང་ནས། ། སྐྱེངས་པས་གདོང་ནི་རྣམ་
པར་དུད། ། རིན་ཆེན་སྣ་ཚོགས་ཅོད་པན་དང༌། ། རྣ་ཆའི་ལྗིད་ཀྱིས་ནོན་པ་
བཞིན། ། ཟོལ་གྱི་ངོ་ཚས་ཕྱིར་ཕྱོགས་ཀྱང་། ། ཆགས་པའི་ཟུར་མིག་ཡང་ཡང་
ལྟ། ། བཅོས་མའི་ཁྲོ་གཉེར་རབ་བསྡུས་ཀྱང་། ། དགའ་བའི་འཛུམ་ཟེར་གསལ་
བར་གྱུར། ། མཐོང་ན་ཡིད་འཕྲོག་གཟུགས་ཅན་གཉིས། ། འགྲན་པ་བཞིན་དུ་དེ་
ན་མཛེས། ། མཛེས་སྡུག་ན་ཚོད་མཚུངས་གྱུར་པ། ། བཞིན་དང་མེ་ལོང་གཟུགས་
བརྙན་བཞིན། ། དེ་ལྟར་འདུག་པ་མཐོང་ནས་གཞོན་ནུས་དེ་ལ་སྨྲས་པ། ཀུན་ད་
བས་ཀྱང་འཇམ་པའི་ལུས། ། གངས་རི་བས་ཀྱང་མདངས་དཀར་ཞིང་། ། རི་
དྭགས་བས་ཀྱང་མིག་མཛེས་མ། ། མི་ལས་གཞན་ཁྱོད་སུ་ཞིག་ཡིན། ། བདག་
ཅག་གསར་དུ་འོངས་པ་ལ། ། ཕེབས་པ་ཙམ་ཡང་མི་སྨྲ་བར། ། རྒྱུད་མངས་ཟོལ་
གྱིས་གནས་པ་ཡི། ། ཁེངས་པར་ལྡན་པ་འདི་ཡིས་ཅི། ། ཁྱོད་ཀྱི་ལུས་འདི་རང་
བཞིན་ཉིད་ཀྱིས་མཐོ་རིས་བུ་མོའི་མཛེས་པ་འཕྲོག་ན་སྣ་ཚོགས་རྒྱན་རྣམས་ཅི་སླད་
འཛིན། ། དཀར་ཞིང་གསལ་བའི་བཞིན་རས་འོད་ཀྱིས་བསིལ་ཟེར་ཅན་ཡང་
སྐྱེངས་པར་གྱུར་ན་སྨུག་རྩིའི་བྱུག་པ་འདིས་ཀྱང་ཅི། ། དལ་བུས་སྨྲ་བའི་གདངས་
སྙན་གྱིས་ཀྱང་ཚངས་པའི་སྒྲ་དབྱངས་ཟིལ་གནོན་ནུས་ན་བཅོས་མའི་གླུ་ཡིས་ཅི་
ཞིག་བྱ། ། ལྷུག་པར་གནས་པའི་སྤྱོད་ཚུལ་ཙམ་གྱིས་ཐུབ་པ་རྣམས་ཀྱི་བརྟན་པ་
འཕྲོག་ན་རྒྱུད་མངས་བསྒྱུར་ལ་བྲེལ་བས་ཅི། ། འབངས་མོས་སྨྲས་པ། རིགས་
དང་སྐལ་བ་ཕུན་སུམ་ཚོགས། ། ཁྱོད་ནི་བྱོན་པ་ཤིན་ཏུ་ལེགས། ། ཡོངས་འདུའི་
ཤིང་གིས་ལྷུན་པོ་བཞིན། ། ས་འདི་ཡོངས་སུ་རྒྱུན་པར་མཛོད། །དགའ་མ་མིག་
གི་བདུད་རྩི་འདི། ། འོ་མའི་ཆུ་གཏེར་བསྲུབས་ལས་བྱུང་། ། རིན་ཆེན་གོས་ཀྱི་
24



;
་
་་་ ་་་ ་་་ ་
་ ་ ་ ་་་ ་་་ ་་་་་་་༌་་་་་་་་་་༌་ " " " "
-
ཟ
:：-
འི་
:" ",
"m" " " "", ", "
" !TI"
་
་
!"
་
""""
riffiiuriilirlrTrrfilTrrIIfrTifiirriirIIiiirrilri*i*rtf*ri°friffittin*rih*rririhiiiiiiiiiiirriiiiiri*iri*iiriih*iriirfi**ti*rririnirvrisitiriirirrWri***Fiiii*fri%ifiihti»»/f*#*#F%h+%
སྣོད་ན་མཛེས། ། སྐབས་གསུམ་བདག་པོའི་སྤྱོད་ཡུལ་ཉིད། ། ལང་ཚོ་གསར་པའི་
སྐྱེད་ཚལ་ལ། ། མེ་ཏོག་འཁྲི་ཤིང་ཅན་ཞེས་བཏགས། ། བྱེད་པོས་རབ་བྲིས་ཀུན་
དགའ་ཡི། ། རི་མོས་ཇི་ལྟར་སྨྲ་བར་འགྱུར། ། མིག་འབྲས་བུང་བ་རྣམ་འཕྲུལ་
སྨིན་མ་ཨུཏྤལ་སྔོན་པོའི་ཚལ། ། སོ་ཡི་ཟེའུ་འབྲུ་རབ་རྒྱས་མཆུ་ནི་ཆུ་སྐྱེས་འདབ་
ལྟར་དམར། ། དྲི་བཟང་ཐིག་ལེའི་ལྷུ་ཕྲེང་ནུ་འབུར་གཡོ་བའི་ངུར་པ་ཅན། །
ཡིད་བཞིན་མཚོ་དང་མཚུངས་པའི་དཔལ་ནི་འདི་ཡིས་རྣམ་པར་འཛིན། ། དེ་
ནས་དལ་གྱིས་གཞོན་ནུ་མ་མེ་ཏོག་འཁྲི་ཤིང་ཅན་འདོད་ཆགས་ཀྱི་གདུང་བ་ཤིན་ཏུ་
བཟོད་དཀའ་བར་གྱུར་ཅིང༌། འབངས་མོ་དེ་རྩེ་དགའི་གེགས་སུ་གནས་པར་རིག་
ནས་དེ་ལ་བོས་ཏེ། གྲོགས་མོ་ཇི་ལྟར་གསར་དུ་འོངས་པའི་སྐྱེ་བོ་འདི་ལ་མགྲོན་དུ་
བྱར་རུང་ བའི་ མེ་ཏོག་དང་འབྲས་བུ་དག་འཐུས་ལ་ཤོག་ ཅིག འབངས་མོས་
དགོད་ཅིང་སྨྲས་པ། ཡིད་ཀྱི་གཙུབ་ཤིང་གིས་གཙུབས་པའི། ། ཆགས་པའི་མེ་ནི་
བཟོད་དཀའ་ཉིད། ། ངོ་ཚས་བརྣག་པར་མ་ནུས་ཏེ། ། འཕྲལ་དུ་མངོན་པར་
གྱུར་ལ་ལྟོས། ། འདོད་ཆགས་གཞུ་ལས་རྩེ་དགའི་མདའ། ། ཕན་ཚུན་རྩེ་བར་
འདོད་པ་དག ། སྔ་ནས་ཤེས་བཞིན་ཁོ་མོ་ནི། ། གཞན་དུ་བསྐྲད་པས་ཅི་ཞིག་
བྱ། ། འོན་ཀྱང་རེ་ཞིག་འགྲོ་བར་བྱའོ། ། ཞེས་ཏེ་སོང་ནས་ཤིང་མྱ་ངན་མེད་པའི་
རྐང་འཐུང་གི་ཕག་ཏུ་ཡིབ་ནས། དེ་གཉིས་ཀྱི་སྤྱོད་པ་ལྟ་ཞིང་འདུག་གོ། དེ་ནས་
གཞོན་ནུ་མ་མེ་ཏོག་འཁྲི་ཤིང་ཅན་རྩེ་དགའ་ལ་འདུན་པ་རིག་ནས། འདོད་ལྷའི་
བུས་སྨྲས་པ། ལུས་ཕྲ་ཁྱོད་ཀྱི་སྐྲ་ཞགས་ཀྱིས། ། བདག་གི་མིག་འབྲས་རི་དྭགས་
ཟུང་། ། ཡིད་ཀྱི་ཤིང་ རྟ་ ལྷན་ ཅིག་བཅིངས། ། གཞན་དུ་གཡོ་བའི་མཐུ་ ལྡན་
མིན། ། བདག་ལུས་ གདུང་ བའི་ དྲོད་ འབར་ ཞིང༌། ། ལི་ ཁྲི་ བྱུགས་ པ་ ལྟ་ བུ་
འདི། ། དགའ་མ་ཁུར་ཚོས་དམར་བ་ཡི། ། ཉི་གཞོན་ཉེ་བར་གྱུར་པ་བཞིན། །
ཁྱོད་ཀྱིས་རེག་པའི་གོས་དཀར་དང༌། །ཨུཏྤལ་དྲིས་བསྒོས་ཁ་ཡི་ཆང་། ། ཀུན་
དགའི་གཏམ་གྱི་རྣ་རྒྱན་དགོ ། སྦྱིན་པས་བདག་ཡིད་ཚིམ་པར་མཛོད། ། དེས་
སྨྲས་པ། ཨེ་མ་ཁྱོད་ལྟ་མཐོང་གྱུར་པ། ། བདག་གི་སྐལ་བ་ཅིས་མ་ཐོབ། ། ལེགས་
་"༌"་༌་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་
་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་ ་
་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་
E:
#
F
%
k
8:
=Fr
-untrurinirth+-++++++-+=
:
:
r
slre:
r e
1:
+F$g-reti
11
+++++/++++++++
%
8e
3
rt
:
=
+3
: -
+
g
g
:;
::-



བྱས་འབྲས་བུ་ཅིས་མ་སྨིན། ། བསོད་ནམས་ཚོང་ཟོང་ཅིས་མ་རྙེད། ། དགའ་
བའི་སྤུ་ལོང་རབ་རྒྱས་པས། ། མྱུ་གུའི་ཚོགས་རྣམས་སྐྱེངས་བྱས་ནས། ། འཛུམ་
པའི་མདངས་ དཀར་ གསལ་ བ་ ནི། ། འདབ་ བརྒྱུའི་ ཚད་ ལ་ འགྲོན་ འདོད་
བཞིན། ། གཞོན་ནུ་ཁྱོད་ཀྱིས་ཟུར་མིག་མཚོན། ། མེ་ཏོག་མདའ་དང་ལྷན་ཅིག་
འཕངས། ། ཀྱེ་མ་ལུས་དང་ཡིད་ཀྱི་རྨ། ། ཚ་བའི་གདུང་བ་མཉམ་དུ་འཕེལ། །
རི་བོང་གཟུགས་བརྙན་མ་བྲིས་ཤིང༌། ། དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་འཕེལ་འགྲིབ་ཡོད་མིན་
པའི། ། རབ་གསལ་གདོང་གི་ཟླ་འོད་འདིས། ། བདག་ཡིད་སྲེག་པར་བྱེད་པ་
མཚར། ། ཁྱོད་ཀྱི་ལང་ཚོའི་ ལྕགས་ཀྱུ་ཡིས། ། སྙིང་ དང་ བརྟན་ པ་ རབ་ ཏུ་
ཕྲོགས། ། གཡོ་མེད་བེམ་པོ་བཞིན་གྱུར་ན། ། བཀུར་སྟི་བྱ་བར་ཇི་ལྟར་ནུས། །
འོན་ཀྱང་རྩེད་འཇོའི་དགའ་སྟོན་ལ། ། རབ་ཏུ་མི་སྤྲོ་སུ་ཞིག་ཡོད། ། འཁོར་ལོ་
གཉིས་ཀྱིས་ཤིང་རྟ་དང་། ། རྐང་པ་ཟུང་གིས་ལུས་བཏེགས་བཞིན། ། ཞེས་སྨྲས་
ནས་དེ་གཉིས་ཀ་སྐྱེད་མོས་ཚལ་གྱི་དབུས་སུ་ཟླ་བ་ཆུ་ཤེལ་གྱི་རྡོ་ལ་འདུག་སྟེ། མེ་
ཏོག་རྣམ་པར་བཀྲ་བ་དག་གིས་ནི་ལུས་བརྒྱན། ཤིང་ཏོག་རབ་ཏུ་སྨིན་པ་བྱ་ངུར་
པའི་མིག་ལྟར་སེར་བ་དག་ནི་ཟ། འཁྲི་ཤིང་གི་འདབ་མ་གཞོན་ནུས་བསིལ་བའི་
རླུང་ནི་གཡབ། ཕན་ཚུན་ཆགས་པའི་མིག་ཟུར་ལྟ་ཞིང་ངོ་མཚར་བའི་གཏམ་དང་
རྩེད་འཇོ་རྣམ་པ་སྣ་ཚོགས་ནི་འཆི་མེད་གྲོང་ན་གནས་པའི་དྲི་ཟ་བཞིན་བྱེད་དོ། །
སྐབས་དེར་མེ་ཏོག་འཁྲི་ཤིང་ཅན་གྱིས་ཤིན་ཏུ་སྙན་པའི་གླུ་དང་རྒྱུད་མངས་ཀྱི་སྒྲ་
སྤེལ་ནས་བྱ་ཀ་ལ་པིང་ཀའི་སྒྲ་ཡང་ཟིལ་གྱིས་གནོན་པ་བཞིན་དུ་བྱས་ཏེ། མཛའ་
བོ་ལ་བསྔགས་པ། ཀ་ཡེ་འདི་ལྟའི་སྐལ་བ་ཅན། ། རིགས་གཟུགས་ལང་ཚོ་ཕུན་
ཚོགས་པ། ། འཇིག་རྟེན་འདི་ན་ཡོད་མིན་ཏེ། ། བྱེད་པོས་སྤྲུལ་པ་ཡིན་ནམ་
ཅི། ། ཚ་ཟེར་མུན་པ་བཞིན་བྱེད་ལ། ། མུན་པའི་ཁྲོད་དུ་སྣང་བ་བསྐྱེད། ། སྐལ་
བཟང་མིག་གི་བདུད་རྩི་སྟེ། ། སྐལ་ངན་ལོང་བར་བྱེད་པ་མཚར། ། དབང་པོའི་
གཞུ་དང་ལེགས་སྤེལ་བའི། ། རབ་དཀར་ཆུ་འཛིན་གཞོན་ནུ་ཞིག ། ས་ཡི་སྟེང་
དུ་བབས་པ་ན། ། ཁྱོད་དང་མཚུངས་པར་འགྱུར་རམ་སྙམ། ། མི་མཐུན་རླུང་
26



-
，，
་
་ ་ ་ ་ ་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་ ་་ ་་ ་ ་་་ ་་ ་ ་ ་ ་ ་ ་ ་ ་ ་ ་ ་ ་
གིས་མི་གཡོ་ཞིང་། ། རབ་གསལ་བློ་མིག་དང་ལྡན་པས། ། དེ་ཡིས་འགྲན་པར་མི་
བཟོད་དེ། །རི་བོའི་རྩེ་ལ་བྲོས་སམ་ཅི། ། བཞིན་རས་ཟླ་བ་རྒྱས་འདྲ་མིག་ནི་པད་
མའི་འདབ་ལྟར་ཡང་། །དུ་བ་འཁྱིལ་འདྲའི་ཐོར་ཚུགས་འགྲམ་པ་རི་དྭགས་རྒྱལ་
པོ་བཞིན། ། ཡན་ལག་པད་རྩ་ལྟར་འཇམ་བྱིན་པ་ཤ་ར་ལྷ་དང་མཚུངས། ། འགྲོ་
འདི་རྒྱུན་པར་བྱ་སླད་མཛེས་པ་ཐམས་ཅད་སྤུངས་པ་འདྲ། ། དེས་ཀྱང་ཡིད་དུ་
འོང་བའི་འཛུམ་གྱིས་མཆུ་ཡི་ཡལ་འདབ་བཀྲུས་ཏེ་དགའ་མ་ལ་དང་བའི་བཞིན་
གྱིས་སྨྲས་པ། མཛེས་མ་བཞིན་གྱི་མེ་ལོང་ལ། ། བདེ་འབྱུང་གཙུག་རྒྱན་འཕོས་
སམ་ཅི། ། ཐིག་ལེ་མཆོག་མའི་ལང་ཚོ་རྣམས། ། མ་ལུས་ཁྱོད་ཀྱིས་ཕྲོགས་པ་
སྙམ། ། གངས་རིའི་རྩེ་ མོ་ བཞུ་བ་ཡི། ། ཁུ་ བས་ ཁྱོད་ཀྱི་ལུས་ལ་བྱུགས། །
མཚམས་སྤྲིན་དམར་བའི་ལི་ཁྲི་ལ། ། མཁུར་ཚོས་སྨུག་རྩི་བྱས་སམ་ཅི། ། ནུ་
འབུར་རྒྱས་པའི་དངུལ་བུམ་དང་། ། མཚང་ར་རིན་ཆེན་སྟེགས་བུ་ཡི། ། བར་ན་
སྐེད་པའི་ཆུ་སྐྱེས་ནི། ། ཡོད་མེད་ད་དུང་ཐེ་ཚོམ་འཛིན། ། རབ་དཀར་སོ་ཡི་ཕྲེང་
བ་ཡི། ། འོད་ཀྱིས་རྒྱུ་སྐར་ཟིལ་མནན་ཏེ། ། པད་མ་རཱ་ག་ལྟར་དམར་མཆུ། །
གློག་ཕྲེང་མཛེས་པ་ཕམ་བྱེད་བཞིན། ། སྡིག་མེད་གནས་ཀྱི་བུ་མོ་དང་། ། མཛེས་
སྡུག་སྲང་ལ་གཞལ་བ་ལས། ། ཁྱོད་ཉིད་ལྷག་པར་ལྕི་བ་ཡིས། ། ནོར་འཛིན་སྟེང་
དུ་ལུས་སམ་སྙམ། ། ཁྱོད་དང་བསིལ་ཟེར་མཚུངས་སོ་ཞེས། ། སྲེད་ལྡན་ཀུ་མུད་
ཚོགས་ཀྱིས་བསྒྲགས། ། དེ་ཚེ་འགྲན་པར་མ་ནུས་པས། ། ཟླ་རྒྱས་ཞུམ་པར་གྱུར་
པ་བཞིན། ། ཁྱོད་ཀྱི་མིག་དཀྱུས་རིང་ཞིང་གསལ་བས་མིག་གི་དཔལ་ཉམས་རི་
དྭགས་དང༌། ། མཁུར་ཚོས་དམར་བའི་སྨུག་རྩིའི་འོད་ཀྱིས་དྲེགས་པ་ཞུམ་པའི་
མཚམས་སྤྲིན་དང་། ། སྐེད་ངོས་ཕྲ་ཞིང་ཡན་ལག་མཛེས་པས་སྐྱེངས་པའི་ཙན་
དན་འཁྲི་ཤིང་རྣམས། ། སྙེམས་པ་བཏང་ནས་ནུབ་རིའི་ངོགས་ལ་བྲོས་ཏེ་འཁོད་
པ་མ་ཡིན་ནམ། ། ཞེས་སོ། དེ་ལྟར་གླུ་གར་དང་རྩེད་མོ་རྣམ་པ་སྣ་ཚོགས་པ་ལ་
སྤྱོད་ཅིང་ཡུན་རིང་དུ་དེ་ན་འདུག་པ་འབངས་མོ་དང༌། ཕུ་བོ་གཉིས་ཀྱིས་ཀྱང་
མཐོང་ནས་མཚར་ཞིང་ཡིད་གཡོ་བར་གྱུར་ཏོ། ། དལ་གྱིས་འབངས་མོ་ཉེ་བར་
་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་
་
་་་་་་་་་༌་་༌༌11
8
འ་༥༣་ལITrnner's"
""Ir
'
''
's4.**
***
****
*
ཏ
s
trirata''''
1!e
''
སཱ
r
--
-
!
F༩ -
-
-!rit
:
，
27
--
-
--
----
--
--
:



འོངས། ། ཇོ་མོ་གཤེགས་པར་མཛོད་ཅེས་བསྐུལ། ། ཁྱོད་ཀྱི་བདག་པོ་ཁང་བཟང་
ན། ། དགའ་མའི་གཟུགས་ལ་སེམས་ཞིང་གནས། ། དུས་མཐའི་སྤྲིན་ལྟར་ངམ་
ནག་པའི། ། སྒྱུག་མོའི་སྤྱོད་ཚུལ་མི་ཤེས་སམ། ། ཚིག་རྩུབ་སེར་བས་མ་བཅོམ་
པ། ། དེ་སྲིད་ཁྱིམ་དུ་འཇུག་པར་རིགས། ། དེ་ཐོས་མཚན་མོའི་ཆུ་སྐྱེས་བཞིན་དུ་
གྱུར། ། སྲེད་ལྡན་མ་དེས་མེ་ལོང་ས་ལ་བཙུགས། ། རྡོ་ལེབ་སྟེང་དུ་ཀུནྡ་ཟུང་
གཅིག་བཞག ། ཟླ་ཤར་སྐྱེད་ཚལ་རྩེ་དགའ་རབ་མཚོན་ནས། །ཡིད་ནི་གཞོན་
ནུའི་གདོང་ལ་ལེགས་བཀོད་དེ། ། ཟོལ་གྱི་གོམ་པས་རང་གི་གནས་སུ་སོང་། །
སྨིན་མའི་གཞུ་བཀང་ཟུར་མིག་མེ་ཏོག་མདའ། ། མཛའ་བོའི་འབེན་ལ་ཕྱིར་
བལྟས་ཡང་ཡང་འཕེན། ། སྙིང་ནི་དགའ་མའི་རྗེས་སུ་རབ་སོང་བས། ། ཁང་
སྟོང་བཞིན་དུ་གཡོ་མེད་ལུས་ཅན་དེ། ། དྲན་པའི་གླེགས་བུར་མཛེས་སྡུག་ཟླ་བའི་
གཟུགས། ། ཀུན་རྟོག་ པིར་གྱིས་འབྲི་ཞིང་དལ་གྱིས་རྒྱུ། ། དེ་ནས་ གཞོན་ནུ་
འདོད་ལྷའི་བུ་དང་། གཞོན་ནུ་དྲག་པོ། མུན་པ་ཅན་དང་ལྷན་ཅིག་སྐྱེད་ཚལ་ན་
རྩེ་ཞིང་། ད་ནི་ཉི་མ་ཡང་ཡོངས་སུ་གྱུར་གྱི་མྱ་ངན་མེད་པའི་ཚལ་འདི་ཉིད་དུ་ཉལ་
བའི་གནས་བརྟག་པར་བྱའོ། ཞེས་སྨྲ་ཞིང་འདུག་གོ། སྐབས་དེར་ཉིན་མོའི་
བདག་པོ་ནི། ། རྟ་ལྗང་བདུན་གྱིས་དྲངས་པ་ཡི། ། རིན་ཆེན་ཤིང་རྟ་རབ་བསྐྱོད་
ནས། ། རྒྱུ་སྐར་ལམ་ལས་ཡང་དག་གཤེགས། ། འཛམ་གླིང་ཉེས་པས་སུན་བྱུང་
སྟེ། ། གཞན་དུ་འགྲོ་བར་བརྩམས་པ་ལས། ། འདབ་བརྒྱའི་ཚལ་ལ་ཆགས་པ་
ཡིས། ། ཕྱིར་ཡང་ལྟ་ བར་བྱེད་ པ་ བཞིན། ། ཐུན་མཚམས་ གོས་ དམར་ གྱིས་
གཡོགས་པའི། ། ནུབ་ཀྱི་རི་རྩེར་དལ་གྱིས་བབས། ། གསེར་གྱིས་མཚན་པའི་
སྟེགས་བུ་ལ། ། མར་གད་བུམ་པ་བཀོད་པ་བཞིན། ། དེ་ནས་བ་གླང་སྤྱོད་གླིང་
གི། ། སྐྱེ་འགྲོའི་ སྐལ་ བས་བོས་པ་ལྟར། ། འོད་ཟེར་འབར་བའི་གྲུར་ཞུགས་
ནས། ། ནུབ་ ཀྱི་ ཆུ་ གཏེར་ ཆེན་ པོར་ སོང་། ། དེ་ མཐོང་ དུས་ ལ་ བབས་ ཤེས་
ནས། ། གཞན་དུ་འགྲོ་བའི་ཟོལ་གྱིས་ནི། ། དགའ་མའི་གྲོང་འདབ་སྐྱེད་ཚལ་
དུ། ། འདོད་ལྷའི་བུ་ནི་རབ་ཏུ་ཞུགས། ། མཛེས་མ་རྐང་པའི་སྨུག་རྩི་ཡི། ། གུར་



གུམ་གྱིས་བྱུགས་ས་གཞི་དེར། ། སོ་རྩི་འཕོ་བའི་མེ་ཏོག་གི། ། དྲི་བཟང་སྣོམ་ཞིང་
དེ་ན་འདུག ། དེ་ནས་ནམ་མཁའི་གྲིབ་མ་བཞིན། ། མུན་པའི་བླ་རེས་ཁེབས་
པར་གྱུར། ། ཕྱོགས་ཀུན་རི་དྭགས་མིག་ཅན་ལ། ། མིག་སྨན་ཚོན་གྱིས་བྱུགས་པ་
བཞིན། ། མཚན་མོ་སྲིན་པོའི་རལ་གྲི་ཡིས། ། ཉིན་མོའི་སྣང་ བ་གཏུབས་ པ་
ཡི། ། ཕྱེ་མ་མཁའ་ལ་གཏོར་བ་ལྟར། ། སྐར་མའི་ཚོགས་ཀྱིས་རབ་ཏུ་གང་། །
མིག་ལྡན་ལོང་བ་བཞིན་དུ་གྱུར། ། ཉིན་མོ་ལོང་བའི་སྣང་བ་འཕེལ། ། ལུས་ཅན་
བདེ་བའི་མལ་དུ་ཉལ། ། ཡིད་ནི་རྨི་ལམ་གྲོང་འདབ་རྒྱུ། ། དལ་གྱིས་ནམ་མཁའི་
གྲོང་ཁྱེར་དུ། ། ཟླ་འཆར་སྣང་བ་གསལ་བ་ནི། ། སྔོ་བསངས་ལྡན་པའི་དགའ་མ་
ལ། ། གོས་ དཀར་ གྱིས་ ནི་ གཡོགས་ པ་ འདྲ། ། དེ་ ནས་ ཤེལ་ གྱི་ གཞལ་མེད་
ཁང་། ། བསིལ་ཟེར་དྲ་བས་རབ་དཀྲིགས་པ། ། སྐྱེ་འགྲོའི་བསོད་ནམས་གཟུགས་
ཅན་བཞིན། ། མཚན་མོའི་དབང་ཕྱུག་མངོན་པར་ཤར། ། དེ་ཚེ་ཡིད་བཞིན་ཆུ་
གཏེར་རྣམས་སུ་ཁྲུས་ཀྱི་སླད་དུ་བབས་པ་ལྟར། ། ཀུན་དགའི་གཟུགས་བརྙན་
རབ་ཏུ་སྣང་བས་ཆུ་ཡང་འོ་མ་བཞིན་དུ་བྱས། ། བདུད་རྩིའི་འོད་ཀྱིས་འགེངས་
པར་བྱེད་བཞིན་ཕྱོགས་ཀུན་རབ་ཏུ་སྣང་ལྡན་པས། ། སྐར་མའི་ཚོགས་དང་ཀུ་
མུད་ཚལ་རྣམས་དགའ་བ་ཅི་ཡང་རྒྱས་པར་གྱུར། ། བདག་པོས་གཉིད་ཀྱི་སྐབས་
ཐོབ་པའི། ། བུ་མོ་མེ་ཏོག་འཁྲི་ཤིང་ཅན། ། རྐང་གདུབ་འཁྲོལ་བའི་སིལ་སྙན་
གྱིས། ། མཛའ་བོ་སྦྱིན་བཞིན་ཚལ་དེར་འོངས། ། མཁའ་དང་ཆུ་ཡི་ཟླ་བ་ལ། །
འགྲན་པ་བཞིན་དུ་ལུས་མཛེས་གཉིས། ། མཚན་མོ་མུན་པ་བྲལ་བ་དང་། ། ཟླ་
བའང་མུན་པ་ལྟ་བུར་བྱེད། ། དེ་ལྟར་གཞོན་ནུ་འདོད་ལྷའི་བུ་དང་གཞོན་ནུ་མ་མེ་
ཏོག་འཁྲི་ཤིང་ཅན་གཉིས་སྐྱེད་མོས་ཚལ་དེར་འདུས་ཏེ་རྡོ་ལེབ་ཡངས་པའི་སྟེང་དུ་
སྟན་སྲབ་མོ་བཏིངས་པ་ལ་འདུག་ནས། བཟའ་བ་དང་བཅའ་བ་ཅུང་ཟད་དག་ལ་
ལོངས་སྤྱོད་ཅིང༌། སྒྲ་ཆེན་པོ་མ་ཡིན་པའི་གླུ་གར་བྱས་ནས། མལ་སྟན་དེ་ལ་བདེ་
བར་ཉལ་ཏེ། འདོད་པ་དག་ཡོངས་སུ་བསྟེན་པར་བྱེད་དོ། དེའི་ཚེ་འདོད་པས་
རབ་ཚིམས་ཀྱང༌། ། དགའ་བས་ངོམས་པ་མེད་པ་བཞིན། ། ཆགས་པས་གཡོ་
29



- མad-4༣༌ བ
མ*
#*
**#
ཨཤ**#**,4M%B#*#མt/F&rt/RFA4AiffRNAN*****#444e.sifutriti ge 4A444/444f1d1/14421,' eAE:3ཏམ ཝིཡ,
* ཀཉྩཡ, ཨ་ཡ
བའི་སེམས་ལྡན་མ། ། ངལ་བས་གཡོ་བ་མེད་བཞིན་གྱུར། ། དཔལ་མོའི་མཆུ་ཡི་
བིམ་པ་ལས། ། མཆིལ་མའི་སྦྲང་རྩི་བཏུངས་པ་ཡིས། ། མྱོས་པ་བཞིན་དུ་འདོད་
ལྷའི་བུ། ། འཕྲལ་དུ་གཉིད་ནི་རབ་ཏུ་བསྟེན། ། བདེ་བའི་ཁུར་གྱིས་དུབ་པ་
ཉིད། ། གཉིད་ཀྱི་ངལ་བསོ་ཐོབ་པ་དེ། ། འབབ་ལྡན་ཤུགས་དང་བྲལ་བ་ཡི། །
འཁོར་ལོ་ལྟ་བུར་དེ་ན་མཛེས། ། དལ་གྱིས་སྲེད་ལྡན་དེ་གཉིས་ཀྱི། ། ངན་སྤྱོད་
འགྲོ་ལ་སྟོན་པ་བཞིན། ། སྐྱ་རེངས་ལྡན་པའི་མེ་ལོང་ནི། ། ཤར་གྱི་ཕྱོགས་ནས་
སྣང་བར་གྱུར། ། དེ་དང་ལྷན་ཅིག་འདོད་པ་ཡི། །རྩེ་དགའི་སྲོག་གཅོད་སྲིན་མོ་
བཞིན། །སྒྱུག་མོ་ཉེ་བར་མངོན་ཕྱོགས་པའི། ། རྐང་པའི་སྒྲ་ནི་མི་སྙན་ཐོས། །
བདག་པོའི་ཁང་བཟང་བོར་ནས་ནི། ། རྐུན་བུའི་གྲོང་རུམ་རྒྱུ་བྱེད་མ། ། གཡོ་
ཅན་མ་དེ་གར་སོང་ཞེས། ། ཚིག་རྩུབ་དུག་མདའ་འཕངས་གྱུར་པ། ། ཆགས་
ལྡན་གཉིས་ཀྱི་སྙིང་ལ་ཟུག ། འཇིགས་པའི་སྤུ་ལོང་རྩུབ་མོ་གཡོས། ། ཡུན་རིང་
འགྲོགས་པའི་བདེ་བ་ལས། ། བརྒྱ་འགྱུར་ལྷག་པའི་སྡུག་བསྔལ་ལྷུང་། ། འབྲལ་
བའི་མེ་ཡིས་རབ་གདུངས་པས། ། བརྟན་པའི་གངས་རི་བཞུ་བ་བཞིན། ། མཆི་
མའི་ཆུ་རྒྱུན་མྱུར་འབབ་པས། ། ནུ་མའི་བུམ་པ་རབ་ཏུ་བཀྲུས། ། ཆུ་སྲིན་ཆེན་
པོས་རུས་སྦལ་ལྟར། ། དབང་བྲལ་མ་དེ་སྒྱུག་མོ་ཡིས། ། རབ་ཏུ་བཟུངས་ནས་
ཡན་ལག་བཅིངས། ། ཤིང་བལ་བཞིན་དུ་བརྡུངས་པར་གྱུར། ། དབུགས་ཀྱིས་
མགྲིན་པ་རབ་རྒྱས་ཤིང་། ། འདར་བའི་ལུས་ཅན་འདོད་ལྷའི་བུ། ། མི་མཐུན་
རླུང་གིས་བདས་པ་བཞིན། ། སྐྲག་པས་ཤིན་ཏུ་མྱུར་བར་བྲོས། ། དེ་ལྟར་གཞོན་
ནུ་འདོད་ལྷའི་བུ་སྐྲག་པའི་ཤུགས་དང་བཅས་ཏེ་འོངས་པ་ཕུ་བོ་གཉིས་ཀྱིས་ཀྱང་
ཚོར་ནས་རྟབ་རྟབ་པོར་གྱུར་ཏེ། རིངས་པ་རིངས་པར་ལངས་ནས་སྤུན་གསུམ་པོ་
ཕྱོགས་དེ་ཉིད་ནས་དོང་བ་དང་འཇིགས་པའི་གཟི་བྱིན་གྱིས་བརྟན་པ་དང་རྣམ་
དཔྱོད་ཀྱི་བློ་ནི་རབ་ཏུ་ཉམས། ནམ་ལངས་ཏུ་ཉེ་བའི་སྣང་བ་ཧ་ཅང་གསལ་བ་མ་
ཡིན་པས་ལམ་འཚོལ་དཀའ་བར་གནས་པ་ལ་མིག་ཀྱང་མི་ལྟ་བར། གོམ་པ་རྒྱུ་
ཚོམ་དུ་འདོར་ཞིང་རྒྱུག་པར་བྱེད་དོ། ། དེའི་ས་ཕྱོགས་དེ་ན་འབབ་ཆུ་ཤིན་ཏུ་དྲག་
པ
ས ་
ཚ ོང་པ་
ག
་གོན་ཀྱིསR****
:ཚ
ཚ
མས་མ
ཚ
མ
་མཛཱ་ཀ8%
《ཀ་མན་1842:3
ct
&s
:4.**
*
ཉ:
*#3151::
1:|:
:



པོ་ཞིག་འདུག་པ་ལ་ཚམ་ཚོམ་དུ་བརྒལ་བ་ལས། ཆུ་དེའི་ཤུགས་ཀྱིས་དེ་དག་ཁྱེར་
བར་གྱུར་ཏོ། དེའི་ཚེ་རྦ་ཀློང་མི་བཟོད་པས་རབ་ཏུ་དཀྲུགས་ཤིང་གཅོང་རོང་གི་
རྡོ་རྣོན་པོ་ལ་ཡང་ཡང་བརྡབས་པས་ཟུག་རྔུ་དཔག་ཏུ་མེད་པ་མྱོང་སྟེ། ཆོ་ངེ་ཆེན་
པོ་བཏབ་པ་དང་། འབབ་ཆུ་དེ་དང་ཉེ་བའི་ཤིང་ནྱ་གྲོ་དྷའི་བསྟི་གནས་གཅིག་ན་
ནུ་བོ་གསུམ་འདུག་པས། སྒྲ་དེ་ཚོར་ནས་འདི་ཅི་ཡིན་ཞེས་བརྟགས་པར། སྐྱེ་བོ་
འཇིགས་པས་ཉེན་པའི་སྨྲེ་སྔགས་དྲག་པོར་རིག་ནས། སྙིང་བརྩེ་བའི་དབང་གིས་
ཆུ་ཀླུང་དེ་ག་ལ་བ་དེར་ཕྱིན་པ་དང་ཕུ་བོ་གསུམ་དེ་ལྟར་གྱུར་པ་མཐོང་ནས་ཐེ་ཚོམ་
མེད་པར་བདག་ཉིད་ཆུའི་ནང་དུ་ཞུགས་ཏེ། ལུས་སྟོབས་ཆེན་པོས་དེ་དག་བཀག་
ཅིང་བཟུང་ནས་འགྲོམ་དུ་ཕྱིན་པར་བྱས་སོ། ། དེར་ཆུའི་རླབས་ཀྱིས་བརྣངས་
ཤིང་ལྟོ་བ་ཁེངས་ཏེ་དྲན་པ་ཉམས་པ་དེ་དག་འཁྲི་ཤིང་གི་ཡལ་ག་དུད་པ་ལ་བཀལ་
ནས་ཆུ་རྣམས་བཙགས་ལ། འབྲུ་མར་གྱི་བྱུག་པའང་བྱས། དལ་གྱིས་དྲན་པ་རྙེད་
པ་དང་ཤིང་ནྱ་གྲོ་དྷའི་བསྟི་གནས་དེར་ཁྲིད་ནས་རབ་ཏུ་དགའ་ཞིང་ཡིད་བདེ་བར་
གྱུར་བཞིན་དུ་འཁོད་དོ། ། གཞོན་ནུ་དེ་དག་ཀྱང་རང་གི་སྲོག་རྙེད་པས་དགའ་བ་
རྒྱ་ཆེན་པོ་ཐོབ་པའི་བཞིན་གྱི་འཛུམ་ཟེར་ཤིན་ཏུ་གསལ་བ་ནི། དེའི་ཚེ་ཉི་མ་
འཆར་ཁའི་འོད་ཀྱི་དྲ་བས་རབ་དུ་མཛེས་པ་ཤར་གྱི་ཕྱོགས་ནས་སྣང་བར་གྱུར་པ་དེ་
དང་འགྲན་པ་བཞིན་དུ་འདུག་གོ དེ་ནས་གཞོན་ནུ་དགེ་བ་ཅན་གྱིས་སྨྲས་པ།
གྲོགས་པོ་དག་བདག་གིས་སྔོན་དུ་སྨྲས་པའི་ཚིག་བདེན་པ་ཉིད་དུ་མ་གྱུར་ཏམ་ཅི།
བདེན་པར་སྨྲ་ལ་ཡིད་མི་རྟོན། ། ཉེས་པའི་ལས་ལ་སྤྲོ་བས་ཞུགས། ། རང་གི་སྲིད་
པའི་ཚོང་ཟོང་གིས། ། སྡུག་བསྔལ་ཁུར་ནི་རབ་ཏུ་ཉོས། ། གཞན་གྱི་བུད་མེད་
འཕྲོག་འདོད་པས། ། རང་གི་སྲོག་ཀྱང་དེའུ་རེ་བོར། ། འདོད་པའི་ཡུལ་ལ་རབ་
ཆགས་པས། ། མི་འདོད་ཟུག་རྔུ་རྙེད་ལ་ལྟོས། ། ངོ་ཚའི་བརྟན་པ་རབ་བྲལ་
ཞིང་། ། ལོག་པའི་ལམ་དུ་རྒྱུགས་པ་ཡི། །སྲེད་པའི་གཅོང་རོང་ནང་དུ་ལྷུང་། །
སྡུག་བསྔལ་རྦ་རླབས་དྲག་པོས་གཡེངས། ། ཆུ་ཀླུང་འདི་ཡིས་ཁྱེར་བའི་ལུས། །
དེ་རིང་ངེད་ཅག་རྣམས་ཀྱིས་བཏོན། ། འདོད་ཆགས་ཆུ་ཡིས་རབ་འཁྱེར་བ། །



་
༔
༔
ལས་༤༢ ༢ ༡༩༤༤， ，
*…….… *
**
， ༈ ༔ ༔ ལ༠༠༠༠༤ - བ༠.༠༠༠ ཆ- -- ，
…， ，
....……
དེ་ལས་སུ་ཡིས་སྐྱོབ་པར་ནུས། ། རི་བོའི་ངོགས་ནས་རབ་ལྷུང་གཅོང་རོང་ནང་
ཞུགས་ཐུར་དུ་མྱུར་འགྲོ་ཞིང༌། ། བྲག་རིའི་ངོས་ལ་བརྡབས་པའི་རླབས་ཕྲེང་རབ་
འཕྲོ་འདི་འདྲ་བརྒལ་དཀའ་མིན། ། སྡིག་ པའི་རི་བོ་ལས་འོངས་ཉོན་མོངས་
རླབས་འཁྲུགས་ངན་འགྲོའི་གཡང་སར་རྒྱུག ། འཁོར་བའི་རྒྱ་མཚོ་རབ་འབབ་སྐྱེ་
རྒ་ན་འཆིའི་ཆུ་འདི་བརྒལ་དཀའ་ཉིད། ། སྡུག་བསྔལ་ཆུ་ཀླུང་སྒྲོལ་ལ་ཟམ་སྟེགས་
ཆོས་ཀྱི་རྒྱ་མཚོར་འཇུག་པའི་གྲུ། ། དགེ་ལེགས་མ་ལུས་སྐྱེད་པའི་ས་གཞི་ཉེས་པའི་
དྲི་བྲལ་ནམ་མཁའ་ཉིད། ། ཕན་བདེའི་ལོ་ཏོག་སྨིན་བྱེད་ཆར་རྒྱུན་སྤྱོད་པའི་རླན་
སྐེམ་རྟ་ལྗང་ཅན། ། སྐྱོ་བྲལ་རྨད་བྱུང་ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས་དེ་ཡི་ཡོན་ཏན་སུ་ཡིས་བརྗོད་
པར་ནུས། ། དེ་སྐད་ཅེས་སྨྲས་པ་དང་། གཞོན་ནུ་དྲག་པོས་སྨྲས་པ། ཀྱི། ཁྱེད་
ཅག་གི་ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས་ནི་ཇི་ལྟ་བུ་ཞིག ཡང་ལན་སྨྲས་པ། ངེད་ཅག་གི་ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས་
ནི་དམན་པའི་སྐྱེ་བོས་རྗེས་སུ་ཡི་རང་བའང་མི་ནུས་པ་ཞིག་གོ འདི་ལྟ་སྟེ། དགྲ་
ལའང་གནོད་པར་མི་སེམས་དབྱེན་དང་ཚིག་རྩུབ་སྤངས་ཤིང་གཞན་གྱི་སྲོག་མི་
གཅོད། ། ལོངས་སྤྱོད་འདོད་པ་མེད་ཅིང་རྫུན་གྱིས་ཕ་རོལ་མི་བསླུ་མ་བྱིན་ནོར་མི་
ལེན། ། ལོག་ལྟ་ངག་ཀྱལ་རབ་སྤངས་གཡོ་སྒྱུ་མེད་ལ་གཞན་གྱི་ཆུང་མར་ཚེ་མི་
བྱེད། ། དགེ་ཆོས་རབ་འཛིན་སྡིག་པ་རྣམས་སྤོངས་གཞན་ཕན་མི་འདོར་འདི་ནི་
ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས་ཉིད། ། གཞོན་ནུ་མུན་པ་ཅན་གྱིས་སྨྲས་པ། གྲོགས་པོ་དག་རྫུན་དུ་མི་
སྨྲ་ཞེས་པ་དེ་ཉིད་ཀྱང་རྫུན་མ་ཡིན་ནམ། ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས་ཀྱི་མཚན་ཉིད་དེ་ལྟ་བུ་ཡིན་
སྲིད་ཀྱང་། ཁྱེད་ཅག་དེ་དང་ལྡན་ཞེས་པ་ལ་སུ་ཞིག་ཡིད་ཆེས་པར་འགྱུར། སྨྲས་
པ། ཀྱེ་མ། བདག་ཅག་དུས་འདི་སྙེད་དུ་འགྲོགས་སུ་ཟིན་ཀྱང་ངེད་ཅག་གི་རང་
བཞིན་ད་དུང་མི་ཤེས་སམ་ཅི། འཕྲལ་དུ་སྟོན་པའི་སྤྱོད་ཚུལ་ཉིད་ཀྱིས་ཀྱང་གོ་
བར་སླ་བ་མ་ཡིན་ནམ། གལ་ཏེ་ཐེ་ཚོམ་གྱི་ལིང་ཏོག་གིས་རྣམ་དཔྱོད་ཀྱི་མིག་
བསྒྲིབས་པར་གྱུར་ན། མངོན་སུམ་དུ་བྱས་པའི་ཐུར་མས་རབ་རིབ་ཀྱི་སྐྱོན་བསལ་
བར་བྱའོ། ཞེས་སོ། ། དེ་ནས་གཞོན་ནུ་གསུམ་ གྱིས་ནམ་མཁའི་ལྷ་རྣམས་ལ་
མགྲིན་གཅིག་ཏུ་སྨྲས་པ། གདོང་བཞི་པ་དང་པད་དཀར་མིག་ཅན་བདེ་འབྱུང་



་
་
་
་ ་
་ ་
་
་ TITTI་་་་་
བདེ་སོགས་བདག་པོ་རྟ་བདུན་རི་བོང་ཅན། ། ལྷ་ཆེན་ཁྱེད་ཅག་འཇིག་རྟེན་འདི་
ན་ལེགས་ ཉེས་སྤྱོད་པ་ཀུན་གྱི་དཔང་ དུ་ གྱུར་ པ་ ཉིད། ། གལ་ཏེ་བདག་ཅག་
འཕགས་ པ་ དགྱེས་ པའི་ཚུལ་ ཁྲིམས་སྐྱོན་མེད་དེ་ དང་ རྟག་ཏུ་ འགྲོགས་ བདེན་
ན། ། འདིར་ནི་རབ་ཏུ་དྭངས་བའི་མཁའ་ལས་ལྷ་ཡིས་མེ་ཏོག་རྣམས་ཀྱི་ཆར་པ་
མྱུར་དུ་ཕོབས། ། དེ་ནས་བདག་ཉིད་ཆེན་པོ་དེ་དག་གི་བདེན་པའི་བྱིན་བརླབས་
ཀྱི་མཐུ་ལས། དེའི་མོད་ལ་ཚངས་པ་ལ་སོགས་པ་ལྷའི་རྒྱལ་པོ་རྣམས་ཀྱིས་ནམ་
མཁའ་ལས། ལྷའི་མེ་ཏོག་རིན་པོ་ཆེ་སྣ་ཚོགས་ལས་གྲུབ་པའི་པདྨ་དང་། ཨུཏྤལ་
དང་། མནྡྷ་ར་བ་དང་། མནྡྷ་ར་བ་ཆེན་པོ་རྣམས་ཀྱི་ཆར་མངོན་པར་ཕབས་སོ།
དེ་ཚེ་སྨྲ་བའི་བདེན་པའི་ཚིག་ལ་ལྷ་རྣམས་རབ་ཏུ་དད་པ་ཡིས། ། རིན་ཆེན་ལས་
གྲུབ་མེ་ཏོག་ཚོགས་རྣམས་དེ་དག་མངོན་པར་མཆོད་ཕྱིར་ཕབས། ། རྣམ་པར་
བཀྲ་བའི་འོད་ཟེར་གསལ་བས་ཐེ་ཚོམ་མུན་པ་སེལ་བ་ བཞིན། ། འདབ་ ཕྲེང་
འཛུམ་ཞིང་གེ་སར་གཡོ་བས་ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས་བསྔགས་པ་བརྗོད་པ་བཞིན། ། དེ་ལྟར་
གྱུར་པ་དང་ཕུ་བོ་གསུམ་ཡང་བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་དཔའི་ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས་རྨད་དུ་བྱུང་བ་
དང༌། བདེན་པའི་ཚིག་གི་མཐུ་ཆེན་པོ་ལ་ཡིད་རབ་ཏུ་དང་ཞིང་ངོ་མཚར་ཐོབ་སྟེ།
དགའ་བ་རྒྱ་ཆེན་པོ་དང་འགྲོགས་ ནས་ སྤུན་ རྣམས་ རང་ གི་ གནས་ སུ་ སོང་ངོ༌།
དད་དང་ངེས་འབྱུང་རྨང་ གཞི་ རབ་ བརྟན་ བསླབ་ པའི་ རིན་ཆེན་ ཕ་ གུ་བཀོད་
ལེགས་ བག་ཡོད་དེས་ པའི་ ར་བས་བསྐོར། ། རྨད་བྱུང་ཡོན་ཏན་ མདའ་ཡབ་
མཛེས་ཤིང་དྲན་དང་ཤེས་བཞིན་དྲ་ཕྱེད་ལེགས་སྤེལ་གཞན་ཕན་བརྩོན་པའི་རྟ་
བབས་ ཅན། ། ལོག་སྒྲུབ་རླུང་གིས་བསྐྱོད་ནུས་ མིན་ལ་ཉོན་མོངས་དགྲ་བོས་
གཞོམ་པར་རབ་དཀའ་སྡུག་བསྔལ་ཚ་གདུང་ཡོངས་སུ་སྐྱོབ། ། ངན་འགྲོ་འགོག་
པའི་སྒོ་གླེགས་དང་ནི་ཐར་པར་བགྲོད་པའི་ཐེམ་སྐས་དང་ལྡན་ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས་ཁང་
བཟང་འདི་འདྲ་མཚར། ། དེ་ལྟར་འཇིག་རྟེན་ན་རྒས་པ་ནི་རྒུད་པ་ཐམས་ཅད་ཀྱི་
མཆོག་ཡིན་པ་དང༌། འདོད་ཆགས་ཀྱིས་ནི་གདུང་བ་དང་འཇིགས་པ་ཐམས་ཅད་
རབ་ཏུ་སྐྱེད་པར་བྱེད་དོ་ཞེས་བྱ་བ་དང་། བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་དཔའ་རྣམས་ནི་སྡོམ་
༣3



སྐཏམཁགཞག་གམ་ཁམnཀའགཏཚམཚནམགཉའགལམཁན་ཨཱན་ད་༡༡ནས་༡༡་བཟའ་ལྕགན་ས་ཝཱན་མཱམས་ཁམས་ནས་ལམ་མམ་འམ་མས་མ༌གཏ
''
ལ་ལས༌
་༌་་་་༌
པ་དང༌། དགེ་བའི་ཆོས་སྡུད་པ་དང་། གཞན་གྱི་དོན་བྱེད་པའི་ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས་དང་
རྟག་ཏུ་འགྲོགས་པའི་ཆེ་བ་ཡོངས་སུ་བརྗོད་པ་དང་། དེ་ལྟར་ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས་དང་
ལྡན་པས་ བདེན་ པའི་ མཐུ་ རབ་ ཏུ་འགྲུབ་ པར་འགྱུར་རོ་ཞེས་ ཀྱང་ སྒྱུར་ བར་
བྱའོ། །རབ་ཏུ་བྱེད་པ་གསུམ་པའོ། ། ། །
111afiliulirlfrihrifliffiihhi°PhriftPirthritifi°rimiiiiiiiiiiiiiiifth?firmiiirhilh4v/%iiiiih?ffair%iii
)
གཙ41:%
8**
**
* ས
a པ་ཙ22
ཀུ ན། །ཀུ༣ཏུའུ་ཞ:ས་པ
ཎཱ
དi:
34



རབ་བྱེད་བཞི་པ་སྙིང་རྗེ་དང་འབྲེལ་
བའི་བཟོད་པ་ལ་བསྔགས་པ།
་ ་ ་ ་ ་ ་་་་་་༌༌་
་
དེ་ནས་དལ་གྱིས་སྟོན་གྱི་དུས་སུ་གྱུར་ཏོ། དེའི་ཚེ་ཤིན་ཏུ་ཡིད་འོང་སྟོན་གྱི་
དུས། ། བསོད་ནམས་རྫོགས་པ་འགྲོ་བ་རྣམས་ལ་འབྱུང་། ། ནོར་འཛིན་བདག་
པོས་སྐྱེ་རྒུ་ཐམས་ཅད་ལ། ། ཅི་འདོད་སྦྱིན་པའི་མཆོད་སྦྱིན་འགྱེད་པ་བཞིན། །
ས་གཞི་ལོ་ཏོག་ཚོགས་ཀྱིས་ཡོངས་བཀང་བ། ། རབ་ཏུ་སྨིན་པས་སེར་པོར་གྱུར་པ་
ནི། ། ཚ་ཟེར་འབར་བས་མཚམས་སྤྲིན་བཞུ་བ་ཡི། ། གསེར་བཞུན་གྱིས་ནི་ས་ལ་
བྱུགས་པ་བཞིན། ། འབྲས་བུ་རྒྱུས་པའི་འཁུར་ལྡན་སྙེ་མའི་ཚོགས། ། བསེར་བུས་
རབ་ བསྐུལ་གཡོ་ བའི་གར་བསྒྱུར་བ། ། སོ་ནམ་ལས་ ཀྱིས་ དུབ་ པའི་དབུགས་
འབྱིན་ཞིང་། ། ཕོངས་པ་རྣམས་ལ་མགྲོན་དུ་གཉེར་བ་བཞིན། ། རོལ་སྒེག་ལུས་
ཅན་འཁྲི་ཤིང་ལག་རྩེ་ཡིས། ། རོ་མངར་བཅུད་ལྡན་ཤིང་ཏོག་རབ་འཐོར་བ། །
རོ་འཛིན་དབང་པོས་ཉེ་བར་སྤྱད་པ་ན། ། རོ་བརྒྱ་ལྡན་པ་བདུད་རྩིའི་སྙེམས་པ་
འཕྲོག ། སྨན་ལྗོངས་འབབ་ཆུས་བརྒྱན་པའི་ས་འཛིན་དག ། ངུར་སྨྲིག་གོས་
ཀྱིས་ལེགས་པར་གཡོགས་པ་ནི། ། དབྱར་གྱི་སྲེད་པའི་འདུ་འཛི་ཡོངས་བཏང་
ནས། ། ཐུབ་པ་རྣམས་དང་བརྟུལ་ཞུགས་འགྲན་པ་འདྲ། ། དེ་ལྟར་གྱུར་པའི་ཚེ་
གཞོན་ནུ་དེ་དག་དགོས་པ་འགའ་ཞིག་གི་ཕྱིར་ནུབ་ཕྱོགས་སུ་འགྲོ་བར་ཆས་ཏེ་ཕྱིན་
པ་དང་། རིའི་ངོགས་ཀྱི་ལམ་གཡང་ལ་ཐུག་པ་ཡ་ང་བ་ཞིག་ན་སྐྱེས་བུ་མཛེ་ནད་
ཀྱིས་ལུས་བཏབ་པ་ཤིན་ཏུ་མི་སྡུག་ཅིང་དྲི་ང་བ་འགའ་ཞིག་ནད་དྲག་པོས་གཟིར་
བས་ལུས་ རྒུད་ དེ་ངོགས་ དེ་ ཉིད་ དུ་འགྱེལ་ཞིང་ལམ་བཀག་ སྟེ་ འདུག་ པ་ དང་།
གཞོན་ནུ་མུན་པ་ཅན་ནི་དེ་དག་ལ་ རྟོག་དཔྱོད་ཚམ་ཚོམ་ ཙམ་ ཡང་ མེད་ པར་
འགོངས་ཏེ་སོང་ངོ༌། འདོད་ལྷའི་བུས་མཐོང་ནས་སྣ་བཀབ་བཞིན་དུ་གྲོགས་དག་
་་་་
་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་ ་ ་ ་ ་ ་
-
I
":
"
=
=
-
--
++
+
+V
'
'
ཡ
35
*r
t
"****
*
་
་
་ -
-



1
,
010
)
•rirriiiiiiiiirriiriirriiruriirti'iirfiiruri'iti'jirriirriirriiirriirwirr***rrriirriiirinirr
i
'irini
riirrii°ri༧ཀirriiiirfiirrii༧ཀhi*#on F
Finair+r'i ཀPr** FཀpYrren Fཀrinp****# F3n+ti+ri++Firihir+Ri************#ry +nrlic/PishantPriihreit;Ftha'i***ia+
ལ་སྨྲས་པ། ཀྱེ་མ་སྐལ་བ་དམན་པའི་མིག་མི་མཐོང་བ་ནི་ཅི་ཞིག་ཡོད། ཡི་དྭགས་
གཟུགས་ལ་འགྲན་པ་ལྟའི། ། སྐྱེས་བུ་འདི་དག་སུ་ཞིག་ཀྱེ། ། རྨ་ཡིས་ལུས་གང་ཁ་
མིག་རལ། ། རྣག་ཁྲག་རྒྱུན་ནི་གཟགས་པ་ལས། ། འབུ་སྲིན་ཚོགས་ཀྱིས་ཟོས་པ་
ཡི། ། ལྷག་མ་ཙམ་ཞིག་ལུས་པ་བཞིན། །རུལ་ཞིང་མྱགས་པའི་དྲི་ངན་གྱིས། །
ཕྱོགས་ཀུན་ཁྱབ་ པར་ གྱུར་ པ་ནི། ། ཤ་ སྦྲང་ཚོགས་རྣམས་འབོད་པ་དང་། །
གཙང་སྦྲ་ལྡན་རྣམས་ སྐྱོད་པ་བཞིན། ། ཞེས་སྨྲས་ནས་ གདོང་ཕྱིར་ཕྱོགས་ཏེ་
འཁོད་དོ། གཞོན་ནུ་ལེགས་པའི་བློ་གྲོས་ཀྱིས་སྨྲས་པ། ནད་ཅེས་བྱ་བ་འཇིགས་
རུང་བ། ། འདི་ནི་གཤིན་རྗེའི་མཆེ་བ་ཡིན། ། ལུས་ཅན་ཀུན་ལ་ཡང་དང་
ཡང་། ། རབ་ཏུ་དྲག་པོས་འདེབས་པར་བྱེད། ། ལང་ཚོ་རྒྱུས་པའི་དཔལ་ལ་རབ་
ཆགས་ཁེངས་པས་ ལྟ་ ཞིང་ གཅེས་པར་འཛིན་བྱེད་ཟས་ དང་ གོས་ ཀྱིས་ རྟག་ཏུ་
མགྲོན་གཉེར་མཛེས་སྡུག་ཡིད་འོང་ལུས་ལྡན་ཡང་། ། དེ་ནི་དུས་ཀྱི་མི་བཟད་ནད་
ཐེབས་འགྲོ་འཆག་ དོར་ ཞིང་ ཟས་ ལ་ རྩོམ་ བྲལ་ མིག་ དཀྱུས་ ཟུམ་ ཞིང་ ལག་ པ་
བསྒྲེངས་ཏེ་ཤིང་རུལ་བཞིན་དུ་ངོགས་སུ་འགྱེལ། ། སྟོབས་ཀྱིས་དབེན་ཞིང་ལུས་
ཀྱི་ཤ་བྲལ་རོ་འཛིན་བསྐམས་པས་མི་ནུས་བཞིན་དུ་སྨྲེ་ངག་སྣ་ཚོགས་འབྱིན་ཞིང་
འགྲེ་ལྡོག་དྲི་ངའི་དབུགས་ཀྱིས་མགྲིན་པ་རྒྱས། །ཟུག་རྔུ་དྲག་པོས་སྐད་ཅིག་ཙམ་
ཡང་དམྱལ་བ་དང་མཚུངས་སྡུག་བསྔལ་རབ་སྟེར་ནད་ཅེས་བྱ་བ་དུས་མཐའི་རླུང་
འདི་ལུས་ཅན་ཀུན་གྱིས་བཟློག་པར་དཀའ། ། དེས་ན་མི་བཟད་ཟུག་རྔུའི་འབྱུང་
གནས་བསྟེན་པར་དཀའ་ཞིང་བྱས་པ་མི་གཟོ་སེམས་ལ་གདུང་བྱེད་གཡོ་བའི་ལུས་
ལ་ཆགས་པའི་འཆིང་བ་རབ་བཏང་ནས། ། ཆུ་ཤིང་བཞིན་དུ་སྙིང་པོ་མེད་པའི་
སྲོག་དང་ལོངས་སྤྱོད་རྩྭ་མཚུངས་འདི་དག་རང་གཞན་དོན་དུ་ཉེ་བར་སྤྱད་ནས་
རྟག་པའི་བདེ་བ་བསྒྲུབ་པར་རིགས། ། དེའི་ཚེ་གཞོན་ནུ་དེ་དག་གིས་སྨྲས་པའི་
ཚིག་རྣམས་ནད་པ་དེ་དག་གིས་ཐོས་ནས་ཁྱད་དུ་བསད་པ་ལྟར་མཐོང་སྟེ། ཡིད་
མི་དགའ་ནས་སྐད་ཆུང་ངུས་རང་ལ་སྨྲས་པ། ཀྱེ་མ་ལང་ཚོའི་མདངས་གསལ་
བས། ། དམན་པའི་ཝ་སྐྱེས་དྲེགས་ལྡན་བྱེད། ། ནད་ཀྱི་སྲིན་བུས་ལུས་བཅོམ་
+sha+++++E*#igtitis
!+༩
*
*#
*
**
*#
*#*
*
i
k
''
i
t
h
=
:
:
;



པའི། ། རི་དྭགས་དགྲ་ཡང་ཞུམ་པ་ཉིད། ། ཅེས་སོ། དེ་ཐོས་པ་ན། དྲག་པོ་
ཁྲོས་ནས་དབྱུག་པ་ཕྱིར་ཏེ། ཀ་ཡེ་ཁྱོད་རེ་ཞིག་སྡོད་ཅིག རང་གི་ལུས་ཉིད་ཀྱིས་
སུན་ཕྱུང་ཞིང་། ཁྱི་དང་བྱ་རོག་ལ་སོགས་པས་ཀྱང་བརྙས་པའི་གནས་སྐྱེ་བོའི་
མིག་གིས་ཀྱང་ལྟ་བར་མི་འོས་པ་ཁྱོད་ཅིའི་ཕྱིར་ངེད་ཅག་རྒྱལ་པོའི་བློན་པོར་གྱུར་པ་
དག་ལ་འཕྱས་འདོགས་པར་བྱེད། འདི་ནི་ཧ་ཅང་ཡང་མི་རིགས་སོ་ཞེས་རྒྱུགས་པ་
དང༌། གཞོན་ནུ་མཉེས་གཤིན་བཟང་པོ་མིག་མཆི་མས་བཀང་སྟེ་དྲག་པོ་ལག་པས་
བཟློག་སྟེ། མ་བྱེད་ མ་ བྱེད་ ཐུབ་ཆོད་ལས། ། འདི་ ནི་ ཁྱོད་ ཉིད་ བཅོམ་ པར་
འགྱུར། །ཉམ་ཆུང་དག་ལ་འཚེ་བ་ནི། ། རང་གི་གྲགས་པ་སུན་འབྱིན་ཉིད། །
འདི་ལྟར་དབུལ་ཕོངས་མཐོང་བཞིན་དུ། ། བརྩེ་བ་ཙམ་ཡང་མི་བྱེད་པར། །
རྩུབ་པོའི་ཚིག་གིས་སྡིགས་བྱེད་པ། ། ཀྱི་ཧུད་སྡིག་པའི་སེམས་འདི་སྨད། ། ཟས་
རྣམས་ནང་ནས་དུག་ཅན་ལྗོན་ཤིང་ཚེར་མ་ཁྲོ་ལྡན་སྐྱེ་བོ་སྨད་པར་འོས། ། མི་སྡུག་
མཚན་མས་ཁེབས་པའི་གདོང་ཡང་མཛེས་ཀྱི་ཁྲོས་པས་བཞིན་འགྱུར་མཛེས་་་་་་་
ཡིན། ། ཡོ་བྱད་ཀུན་དང་བྲལ་ཡང་དབུལ་པོ་མིན་ཏེ་བཟོད་པའི་ནོར་མེད་ཤིན་ཏུ་
དབུལ། ། དགྲ་བོའི་དཔུང་གིས་གྲགས་པ་གཞོམ་པར་མི་ནུས་རང་གི་ཁྲོ་བས་སྐད་
ཅིག་འཇོམས། ། ཁྲོ་བས་རང་ཉིད་བརླག་འགྱུར་རལ་གྲིའི་སོ་ལ་རེག་ན་རང་གི་
ཡན་ལག་གཅོད། ། བཟོད་པས་བདག་སྲུང་སྲ་བའི་གོ་ཆ་བགོས་པས་གཡུལ་ངོའི་
མཚོན་ཡང་སྐྱེངས་པར་བྱེད། ། ཁོང་ཁྲོ་ལྟ་བུ་སྐྱེ་འགྲོ་འཇོམ་པའི་དཔའ་བོ་སྲིད་པ་
གསུམ་ན་ཡོད་མིན་ཏེ། ། བཟོད་པ་ལྟ་བུའི་སྐྱབས་ཀྱང་རྙེད་དཀའ་དེ་ཕྱིར་རྟག་ཏུ་
བཟོད་ལ་བསྟེན་པར་གྱིས། ། ཞེས་སྨྲས་པ་དང་དེས་ཀྱང་ཁྲོས་པ་བཏང་ངོ༌། དེ་
ནས་གཞོན་ནུ་ལེགས་པའི་བློ་གྲོས་ལ་སོགས་པས་པད་མའི་རྩ་བ་ལྟར་འཇམ་ཞིང་
ཡིད་དུ་འོང་ བའི་ལག་ པ་བརྐྱངས་ནས་ ཕོངས་ པ་ དེ་ དག་ གི་ མགོ་ ལ་ ཕྱུགས་ ཏེ།
མཛེའི་ནད་གསོ་བའི་ཕྱིར། དགོས་པའི་དབང་གིས་འཛེམ་དོགས་མེད་པར་ཤུ་
བས་བཀབ་པའི་རྨ་རྣམས་འཇིབས་པ་དང་། ཆུ་སེར་གྱི་རྒྱུན་ཞོ་ལྟར་འབབ་པས་
ཁ་བཀང་བ་ཕྱིར་འཕོ་ཞིང་། དེའི་ཤུལ་དུ་སྨན་བཟང་པོ་སྦྱར་བ་བཏབ་ནས་ནད་



.......... ......
་, , " N
A4Wus s
ས
ts=1
i
n
*
*#
*
*
*
#***
****
*
#
sit
i-
s:
/tid=iiiiiiiiii#
*
**
*#hri+stiltirra******in''iri+in*ir in***rir-AY**ri''i'iri''''iiiiiiiirftiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiirriiiiiiiirriiniiiiiiirriirihrtiiiiiiiiiiiiiiirtiritrixistriihtirrtifiirriihr6hrreifjfheriFFFFI*Fir'
Fo *fiir'hiiiiir''i*ju?'i***rti?i*fritin?ijiji
ཀྱི་ཟུག་རྔུ་དག་ཞི་བར་བྱས་སོ། ། དེ་མཐོང་བ་དང་། བདག་ཉིད་ཆེན་པོའི་སྤྱོད་
པ་དམན་པའི་བློ་ཡིས་བཟོད་པར་དཀའ་བ་དེ་ལ་མ་རངས་ཏེ། དྲག་པོ་ཁྲོ་བ་དང་
བཅས་པས་སྨྲས་པ། ཀ་ཡེ། ངེད་ཀྱི་གནོད་པ་ཅི་ཡང་མ་བྱས་ན། ། ཅི་ཕྱིར་ཁྱེད་
ཅག་ངེད་ཀྱི་འཚོ་བ་གཅོད། ། ངན་སྤྱོད་འདི་འདྲ་མཐོང་བས་མགྲིན་འཆུས་
ཏེ། ། རོ་བརྒྱ་ལྡན་པའང་སུ་ཡིས་ཟ་བར་ནུས། ། སྡིག་པ་མངོན་སུམ་སྨིན་པ་
བཞིན། ། མི་གཙང་རྫས་རྣམས་བསགས་པ་བཞིན། ། འཇིག་རྟེན་རྣམས་ལ་སུན་
འབྱིན་བཞིན། ། ཕྱོགས་ཀུན་རྨོངས་པར་བྱེད་པ་བཞིན། ། མི་གཙང་སྐྱལ་པ་འདི་
དག་ལས། ། རྣག་ཁྲག་འཐུང་བས་ཚིམས་གྱུར་པ། ། ཁྱེད་ཅག་ཁམས་དང་ལུས་
བརྟས་བཞིན། ། གོ་འཕང་མཆོག་ཅིག་འཐོབ་འགྱུར་གྲང་། ། གཞོན་ནུ་དགེ་བ་
ཅན་དགོད་ཅིང་། དྲག་པོས་ མཚོན་ཕུ་བོ་རྣམས་ལ་སྨྲས་ པ། སྤྱོད་ཚུལ་འདི་
མཐོང་ཁྱོད་ཅག་ཡིད་བྱུང་ནས། ། ཁ་ཟས་དོན་གཉེར་རྩོམ་པ་མི་ནུས་ན། ། ཁུ་
ཁྲག་བཤང་གཅིས་ཁེངས་པའི་ལུས་འདི་དང་། ། རྟག་ཏུ་འགྲོགས་བཞིན་ཇི་ལྟར་
འཚོ་བར་བྱས། ། ངོ་ཚ་ཆུང་ཞིང་ཕ་རོལ་བསླུ་བ་དང༌། ། སྡིག་དང་གཡོ་སྒྱུ་ངན་
སྤྱོད་སྣ་ཚོགས་པ། ། དམ་པ་རྣམས་ཀྱིས་སྨད་པའི་གནས་དེ་དག ། གཙང་སྦྲ་
ལྡན་ཁྱེད་ཅི་ཕྱིར་འདོར་མི་བྱེད། ། མི་འདོད་ཟུག་རྔུ་བརྒྱ་ཕྲག་དུ་མ་ཡིས། ། ལུས་
ཅན་ཀུན་ལ་རྟག་ཏུ་གདུང་བར་བྱེད། ། ནུས་བཞིན་འདི་ལ་ཕན་པ་མ་བྱས་ན། །
ཉོན་མོངས་ནད་ལས་བདག་ཅག་ཇི་ལྟར་ཐར། ། དེ་སྐད་ཅེས་སྨྲས་པ་དང་། ཕུ་
བོ་གསུམ་ཡང་ཅང་མི་སྨྲ་བར་འདུག་གོ དེའི་ཚེ་ནད་པ་དེ་དག་རབ་ཏུ་མགུ་བར་
གྱུར་པས་འཛུམ་གྱིས་བཀྲུས་པའི་བཞིན་དྭངས་བས། སྐྱེས་བུ་དམ་པ་དེ་དག་ལ་
བལྟས་ཏེ་ཐལ་མོ་སྦྱར་ནས་འདི་ལྟར་བརྗོད་པར་བྱེད་དོ། སློང་ལ་དཔག་བསམ་
ཤིང་དང་ནད་ཀྱིས་གདུང་ལ་སྨན་པ་ཕོངས་པ་རྣམས་ལ་ཕ་དང་མ། ། དུབ་པའི་
མགྲོན་ལ་ངལ་བསོ་ལམ་རིང་དག་ལ་ལམ་མཁན་འཇིགས་པས་ཉེན་ལ་དབུགས་
འབྱིན་མཆོག ། འཁོར་བ་སྒྲོལ་ལ་དེད་དཔོན་སྡིག་པ་འཇོམས་ལ་དཔའ་བོ་འགྲོ་
ལ་སྣང་མཛད་ཁྱོད་ཅག་ལ། ། བདག་ཅག་ཇི་སྲིད་འཚོ་བར་འགྲེང་འཆག་ཉལ་
'ifiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii..



འདུག་ཀུན་ལ་རྟག་ཏུ་དྲན་པས་ཕྱག་འཚལ་ལོ། ། སྐལ་བ་ཆེན་པོ་དུས་ཐམས་ཅད་
དུ་རྒྱལ་བར་གྱུར་ཅིག་ཅེས་རྐང་པ་ལ་གཏུགས་སོ། དེ་ནས་གཞོན་ནུ་དག་ཡིད་
དགའ་བཞིན་དུ་ཕྱོགས་དེ་ཉིད་ནས་ལངས་ཏེ་སོང་ངོ༌། དེ་ནས་རིམ་གྱིས་དོང་
དོང་བ་ལས་ཉི་མ་ཡང་ཡོངས་སུ་གྱུར་ཏེ། ད་ནི་བཅོམ་ལྡན་འོད་ཟེར་སྟོང་ཕྲག་
ཅན་ཡང་ནུབ་ཀྱི་ལྷུན་པོའི་བསྟི་གནས་སུ་ཡུད་ཙམ་ངལ་བསོ་ཞིང་ཐུན་མཚམས་ཀྱི་
བུ་མོའི་སྨུག་རྩི་ལ་ལྷག་པར་ཡང་ཆགས་པའི་དྲོད་ཀྱི་གདུང་བ་འབར་བ་བསིལ་བར་
འདོད་པ་བཞིན་དུ་ནུབ་ཀྱི་ཆུ་གཏེར་ཆེན་པོར་འཇུག་པར་འདོད་དོ། དེ་ལ་ཉེ་
བར་ཆགས་པའི་ཆུ་གཏེར་རྒྱས་པའི་ཚལ་དག་ཀྱང་དེའི་ཕྱི་བཞིན་དུ་འབྲོས་པར་
དོགས་པའི་ཕྱིར་མཚན་ མོ་ རྒྱུ་བ་ དག་ གིས་ མུན་པའི་རྒྱུར་ རབ་ ཏུ་ བཅིངས་ ཏེ།
བདག་ཅག་ཀྱང་གཞན་དུ་འགྲོ་བར་མི་ནུས་ཀྱི། ཉེ་འཁོར་འདི་ཉིད་དུ་བསྟི་གནས་
བཙལ་ཏེ་འདུག་པར་བྱའོ། ཞེས་སྨྲས་ནས། རྣམ་པར་བཀྲ་བའི་བྲག་རི་དབང་
པོའི་གཞུ་རླུང་གིས་གཏུབས་པའི་དུམ་བུ་བརྩིགས་པ་ལྟ་བུའི་བྱ་སྐྱིབས་ཞིག་ཏུ་
གནས་བཅས་ཏེ་འདུག་གོ ། དེ་ནས་དལ་གྱིས་མུན་པའི་ཁྲོད་དུ་ལྷུང་བའི་སྐྱེ་བོ་
རྣམས་ལ་ངལ་བསོ་སྟེར་བའི་སོར་མོ་བརྐྱངས་པ་ལྟ་བུའི་འོད་ཟེར་དཀར་པོ་རབ་ཏུ་
འགྱེད་པར་མཛད་པ་རྒྱུ་སྐར་རྣམས་ཀྱི་བདག་པོ་ནི་ནམ་མཁའི་དཀྱིལ་ན་འཛེགས་
ཏེ་འདུག་པར་མཐོང་བ་དང་། གཞོན་ནུ་དེ་དག་གཉིད་ཀྱི་བདེ་བ་ལྷའི་བསམ་
གཏན་གྱི་རོ་མྱང་བ་ལྟ་བུ་ལ་ཡོངས་སུ་ཆགས་པར་གྱུར་ཏོ། ། དེ་ནས་ཐོ་རེངས་ཀྱི་
ཆར་གྱུར་པའི་ཚེ། གཞོན་ནུ་ལེགས་པའི་བློ་གྲོས་ཀྱིས་ལངས་ཏེ་གྲོགས་དག་ལ་
སྦྲན་པ། ད་ནི་མཚན་མོའང་ཐུན་གྱི་ཐ་མར་གྱུར་གྱི་ལོངས་ཤིག ས་ཕྱོགས་འདི་
ཡང་ཆོམ་རྐུན་དུ་མ་རྒྱུ་ཞིང་ཡ་ང་བའི་གནས་ཡིན་ཏེ། ཇི་སྲིད་ནམ་ལངས་ཀྱི་བར་
མ་གྱུར་པ་དེ་སྲིད་དུ་བས་མཐའ་འདི་བརྒལ་བར་བྱའོ། དེ་ནས་མྱུར་བར་ལངས་
ཏེ་ཤོག་ཅིག་ཅེས་སྨྲས་ནས་ནུ་བོ་གསུམ་ཕྱོགས་དེ་ཉིད་ནས་ལངས་ཏེ་སོང་ངོ༌། ཕུ་
བོ་གསུམ་ནི་མལ་ནས་མགོ་བཏེགས་ཏེ་གཞོན་ནུ་མུན་པ་ཅན་གྱིས། ད་དུང་འགྲོ་
བའི་དུས་ལ་མ་བབས་སོ་ཞེས་སླར་ཡང་ཉལ་ལོ། གཉིད་ཀྱི་མྱོས་པ་དག་ལ་བྱ་དང་



་༌''''༣ fir/ཀ45 11aff MA'ཀyents#*#s/lf;P%8
##*#BKf8%gri*%i##53},4:44:41 48i%ic/69%84+i%F%}%85%y', fr/?pཝིཏྟ
?
%9%tE7%88%iviaggi@y&ja+%
ཚུ
མི་བྱའི་ གཏོལ་མེད་སྲོག་ལའང་ གཅེས་ པ་ཡོད་མིན་ཏེ། ། བརྡེགས་ཀྱང་རྣམ་
འགྱུར་མེད་ཅིང་བསྐྱོད་ཀྱང་སད་པར་མི་འགྱུར་འབྲུག་སྟོང་གྲགས་ཀྱང་ཐོས་མ་
ཡིན། ། ལུས་ཀྱི་རྩོམ་པ་བྲལ་ལ་ཡིད་ཀྱི་རྟོག་དཔྱོད་སྤངས་ཀྱང་ང་རོ་མི་སྙན་སྣ་
ཚོགས་སྒྲོག ། སྨྱོན་པ་དག་གམ་བེམ་པོའི་ཕག་གམ་དུད་འགྲོ་གཞན་ཡང་དེ་ཡི་
དཔེ་ཟླར་བཟོད་པ་མེད། ། སྐབས་དེར་ནམ་མཁའི་སྐྱེད་ཚལ་དུ། ། རྒྱུ་སྐར་
དགའ་མའི་འཁོར་གྱིས་ནི། ། ཡོངས་སུ་བསྐོར་ཞིང་བརྩེ་ལྡན་པ། ། ཀུན་དགའི་
བཞིན་ལྡན་ཡུན་རིང་འཁྱམས། ། ཆགས་པའི་འཛུམ་གྱིས་མིག་ཟུམ་ཞིང༌། །
བདུད་རྩིའི་བཏུང་བས་མྱོས་པ་དེ། ། ཨན་ད་རྙིལ་གྱི་ངོས་འཇམ་ལ། ། རབ་ཏུ་
འདྲེད་ནས་རྒྱ་མཚོར་ལྷུང་། ། དེ་མཐོང་མཆི་མའི་བདུད་རྩི་ཡི། ། མི་ཀྱོག་རྐང་
ལྡན་སྔོ་བསངས་མའི། །སྐར་ཕྲེང་དོ་ཤལ་རིམ་གྱིས་ནི། ། སྐྱ་རེངས་འོད་ཆེན་
ཆོམ་པོས་བརྐུས། ། བདག་པོས་བཏང་བཞིན་རྒྱུན་རྣམས་དང་། ། བྲལ་བར་
མཐོང་ནས་ མཚན་མོ་ཡང༌། ། མྱ་ངན་དྲག་པོས་ཞུམ་པ་བཞིན། ། དལ་གྱིས་
མཐོང་བ་མིན་པར་གྱུར། ། དེ་ལྟར་གྱུར་པའི་ཚེ། ཕུ་བོ་གསུམ་ཡང་གཉིད་སད་
པར་གྱུར་ནས་གོས་གྱོན་ཞིང་འགྲོ་བར་བསམས་པ་དང༌། སྲིན་པོ་མངོན་སུམ་དུ་
འོངས་པ་ལྟར། བཞིན་མི་སྡུག་ཅིང་མདོག་སེར་སྐྱར་འདུག་པ། ཞགས་པ་སྐེད་པ་
ལ་བཅིངས་ཤིང༌། དབྱུག་པ་དང༌། རལ་གྲི་དང་། དགྲ་སྟ་འཛིན་པ། མ་རུངས་
པའི་ཤུགས་དང་བཅས་པའི་ཆོམ་རྐུན་པ་འགའ་ཞིག འདམ་བུའི་ཚལ་དུ་གླང་པོ་
འཇུག་པ་ལྟར་དེ་ཉིད་དུ་ལྷགས་སོ། དེ་མཐོང་སྐྲག་པས་ཟིལ་མནན་ཡན་ལག་རབ་
འདར་ཁ་སྐམ་མིག་ནི་རིག་རིག་ལྟ་ཞིང་བརྟན་པ་ཉམས། །ལུས་ཀྱི་རྩལ་དང་དྲག་
ཤུལ་དེ་དག་བྲོས་སམ་མི་བཟོད་ཁྲོ་བ་དྲག་པོ་དེ་ཚེ་ཞི་གྱུར་ཏམ། ། རང་གི་གོམ་
ཚུགས་བརྟན་པོར་འཇོག་ནུས་མིན་ན་ཕ་རོལ་དགྲ་ལ་བརྒལ་བར་བྱ་བ་ཇི་ལྟར་
ནུས། ། སྙིང་སྟོབས་མེད་ཀྱང་ཁྲོ་བ་རྒྱས་པའི་སྡར་མ་རྣམས་ནི་ཉམ་ཆུང་འཇོམས་
ལ་ལྷག་པར་དཔའ་བར་ཟད། ། དེ་ལྟར་ཆོམ་རྐུན་དེ་དག་གིས་གཞོན་ནུ་གསུམ་གྱི་
གོས་དང་རྒྱན་ལ་སོགས་པ་བདོག་པ་ཐམས་ཅད་ཕྲོགས་ཤིང་། ལུས་བྲམ་ཟེའི་རལ་
ལུ ་ ཀྱིte/39:
342438429
2/%93%
81
40
::



པ་ལྟར་བཅིངས་པས་ཆོ་ངེ་རྣམ་པ་སྣ་ཚོགས་འདེབས་པར་བྱེད་དོ། སྐབས་དེར་ནུ་
བོ་གསུམ་སྔོན་ལ་དོང་བས། ཕྱིར་ཡང་ཡང་བལྟས་ཀྱང་ཕུ་བོ་གསུམ་འོང་བ་མ་
མཐོང་བས་འདི་ཅི་ཉེས་ཞེས་སླར་ལོག་པ་ན། དེ་དག་དེ་ལྟར་གྱུར་པ་མཐོང་ནས།
རིངས་པ་རིངས་པར་ཕྱིན་པ་དང༌། གཞོན་ནུ་གསུམ་ལུས་གོ་ཆ་དང་མཚོན་བཟུང་
བ་མེད་བཞིན་དུ་ཚམ་ཚོམ་མེད་པར་འོངས་པ་ཆོམ་རྐུན་དེ་དག་གིས་མཐོང་བ་ལས།
ཧ་ཅང་མ་རངས་ཏེ་ཤུགས་དང་བཅས་པས་རྒྱུགས་ནས་དེ་དག་གི་ལུས་ལ་ཞགས་པ་
བཏབ་སྟེ་སྐྱེལ་བར་བརྩམས་པ་ལས་བྲག་རི་ཆེན་པོ་ལ་ཐག་པ་བཏགས་པ་ལྟར་ཅུང་
ཟད་ཀྱང་སྒུལ་བར་མ་ནུས་ཏེ། སླར་གཞོན་ནུ་དག་གིས་ལུས་ཅུང་ཟད་བསྐྱོད་པ་
ཙམ་གྱིས་ཞགས་པ་རྣམས་ཀྱང་དུམ་བུ་དུམ་བུར་ཆད་དོ། དེ་ལྟ་བུའི་ཚན་པོ་ཆེའི་
སྟོབས་དང་ལྡན་ཡང་ལན་དུ་གནོད་པ་མི་བྱེད་ ཅིང་། སེམས་རབ་ཏུ་ཞི་བར་
འདུག་པ་མཐོང་ནས་འཇིགས་པ་དང་ངོ་མཚར་བའི་སེམས་འགྲན་པ་བཞིན་དུ་
ཆེར་གཡོས་པར་གྱུར་ཏོ། དེའི་ཚེ་དགྲ་བོའི་མཐུ་ཡིས་ཟིལ་མནན་མ་གྱུར་སྙིང་
སྟོབས་བརྟན་པས་དགྲ་ཡང་ཟིལ་གྱིས་མནན། ། སྲ་བའི་ཞགས་ པས་ཡན་ལག་
འཆིང་བར་མ་ནུས་སྙིང་རྗེའི་ཞགས་པས་ཡིད་ནི་དམ་པར་བཅིངས། ། ཆོམ་རྐུན་
དག་གིས་ཡོ་བྱད་འཕྲོག་པར་མ་སྤོབས་ང་རྒྱལ་ནོར་ནི་མ་ལུས་དེ་ཡིས་ཕྲོགས། ། ཁྲོ་
ཞིང་གཏུམ་པས་གཞོམ་པར་འདོད་པ་དེ་དག་ཞི་ཞིང་དེས་པའི་སྤྱོད་པས་ཤིན་ཏུ་
བཅོམ། ། མེ་ཁྱེར་འོད་ཀྱིས་རྒྱ་མཚོ་སྐམ་པར་འདོད་དམ་འབར་བའི་མེ་དཔུང་རྩྭ་
ཡི་ཞགས་པས་འཆིང་བ་འམ། ། སྦྲང་བུའི་འདོམ་གྱིས་ནམ་མཁའ་འཇལ་བར་
བྱེད་དམ་བྲག་རིའི་རྩེ་མོ་ཞ་ཉེའི་རལ་གྲིས་གཅོད་པ་འམ། ། རྔ་ཡབ་རླུང་གིས་
ཡོངས་འདུ་བསྐྱོད་ པར་འདོད་དམ་ ལྷུན་པོའི་རྒྱ་ཁྱོན་ཆུ་བུར་མིག་གིས་ལྟ་བྱེད་
དམ། །དམན་པའི་སྐྱེ་བོས་བདག་ཉིད་ཆེ་རྣམས་གཞོམ་འདོད་དེ་དག་རང་རང་
ཕམ་བྱེད་ཕྱུགས་བཞིན་བླུན་པར་མཚུངས། ། དེའི་ཚེ་ཆོམ་རྐུན་རྣམས་ཀྱིས་གཞོན་
ནུ་དག་གི་རྐང་པ་ལ་གཏུགས་ཏེ། ལྷ་རྣམས་མཁྱེན་པར་མཛོད་ཅིག ཁོ་བོ་ཅག་
གིས་མི་ལེགས་པའི་འཁྲུལ་པས་ནོངས་པ་བགྱིས་པ་ལགས་ཀྱི་བཟོད་པར་མཛད་དུ་



ངེད་ཅག་ལྷ་ཉིད་
གསོལ། འདི་ལྟར་དབུལ་ཞིང་ཟས་དང་བྲལ་བས་མི་རྣམས་ཀྱི་ཡོ་བྱད་ཕྲོགས་ཏེ་
འཚལ་བ་ནི་བདག་ཅག་རྣམས་ཀྱི་འཚོ་བ་ལགས་ན། གལ་ཏེ་མི་རྣམས་ཡོངས་སུ་
བསྐྱབས་པས་བདག་ཅག་འཚོ་བ་དང་བྲལ་བར་མི་མཛད་དུ་གསོལ། གཞོན་ནུ་
རྣམས་ཀྱིས་སྨྲས་པ། གྲོགས་པོ་དག་དྭངས་བར་མཛོད་ཅིག
ཀྱང་མ་ཡིན་གྱི། ཚན་པོ་ཆེའི་སྟོབས་དང་ལྡན་ཡང་། ཁྱེད་ཅག་ལ་གནོད་པ་ག་ལ་
བྱེད། ངེད་ཅག་གི་སྲོག་དང་བདོག་པ་ཐམས་ཅད་ཅི་དགའ་བར་ཁྱེད་ལ་བྱིན་གྱི།
བློ་ཆུང་ཞིང་གནོད་པ་མི་བཟོད་པའི་སྐྱེ་བོ་འདི་དག་བཏང་བར་གྱིས་ཤིག དེ་ལྟར་
ན་ནི་ནོར་ཆེན་པོ་དང་བསོད་ནམས་དང་ཡང་ལྡན་པར་འགྱུར་རོ། ཆོམ་རྐུན་
རྣམས་ཡ་མཚན་དུ་གྱུར་ནས་སྨྲས་པ། ཨེ་མ། སྟོབས་དང་སྤྱོད་ཚུལ་ལྷ་མི་ལས་
འདས་རྨད་བྱུང་འདི་འདྲ་སྐྱེ་བོའི་འཇིག་རྟེན་གང་ན་ཡོད་པ་སྨྲོས། ། འཇིག་རྟེན་
པ་རྣམས་ལུས་སྲོག་བསྲུང་ཕྱིར་གཉེན་ཡང་བསླུ་བར་བྱེད་ལ་དགྲ་ལ་ཤ་འཁོན་ཤིན་
ཏུ་བརྩོན། ། ནོར་དང་སྲོག་ལ་ལྟོས་པ་མེད་ཅིང་དགྲ་ལ་འཁོན་དུ་མི་འཛིན་གནོད་
བྱེད་ལན་དུ་ཕན་འདོགས་པ། ། འཇིག་རྟེན་སྤྱོད་དང་ཤིན་ཏུ་འགལ་བའི་བརྟུལ་
ཞུགས་འདི་འདྲ་སུ་ཡི་གཞུང་ལུགས་ཡིན་པ་བདག་མི་ཤེས། ། གཞོན་ནུ་ལེགས་
པའི་བློ་གྲོས་ཀྱིས་སྨྲས་པ། འདི་ནི་འཇིག་རྟེན་སྐྱེ་བོའི་སྤྱོད་མིན་ལྷ་དང་ཚངས་
པས་བཤད་པ་མིན། ། ཐུབ་དབང་བླ་མས་ངེས་པར་འབྱུང་བ་ལེགས་པའི་ལམ་
འདི་དེ་ཡིས་བསྟན། ། འཇིག་རྟེན་འདས་པ་ཐར་པའི་ཡུལ་ཉིད་ངེད་ཅག་དེ་ཡི་
རིགས་སུ་སྐྱེས། ། དམན་པའི་བློ་ཡིས་ཤེས་པར་དཀའ་བའི་བརྟུལ་ཞུགས་འདི་ནི་
བཟོད་པ་འོ། ། དེ་སྐད་ཅེས་རྨད་དུ་བྱུང་བའི་གཏམ་དང༌། མཐུ་ཆེན་པོ་མཐོང་
བས་ཆོམ་རྐུན་པ་རྣམས་ཀྱང་ཡུན་རིང་པོ་ནས་གོམས་པས་སྲ་བ་སྡིག་པའི་སེམས་ནི་
ཞི། ངོ་མཚར་བ་དང་དད་པའི་སྐལ་བ་ནི་གསར་དུ་ཐོབ་སྟེ། བཅིངས་པ་རྣམས་
བཀྲོལ་ཞིང་དབུགས་ཕྱུང་ལ། མིག་མཆི་མས་གང་བཞིན་དུ་ཕྱག་འཚལ་ནས་སྨྲས་
པ། ཁྲོ་བས་ལོང་ལ་མིག་ཐུར་གཡང་སར་ལྷུང་ལ་འཆེལ་བ་མུན་ནང་འཁྱམས་ལ་
སྒྲོན་མེ་སྟེ། ། རྙེད་པར་དཀའ་བའི་ནོར་བུ་ཕན་པ་སྦྱིན་བྱེད་གཉེན་བཤེས་ ཅི་
༤ དཀ དཀai+&+ti+irailshi ༧ +++f•Ri+imiith/ ༩ 1 ' '''' in**#tr»*#%13:3788f1&giftw341# #***##t;'';
;\8?11&i#ti238<%8%f*#n%xia:
81:%g#;P:}}
{ན་??9%%83978839293%
E8 %91
%
A1%e
5 ཨུད་



འདོད་འབྱུང་བའི་རིན་ཆེན་གཏེར། ། ཉོན་མོངས་རྣམས་ཀྱི་དགྲ་བོ་འཇིག་རྟེན་
དགའ་བའི་འགལ་ཟླ་འཆིང་བ་གཅོད་པའི་མཚོན་ཆ་ཉིད། ། ཟིལ་གྱིས་མི་ནོན་
སེང་གེ་མཐུ་སྟོབས་ཕུན་ཚོགས་ལྷ་དབང་རབ་ཞི་ཐུབ་པ་རྒྱལ་གྱུར་ཅིག ། བདག་
ཉིད་ཆེན་པོ་རྣམས་ཀྱིས་སྡིག་པ་ཅན་དག་ཡོངས་སུ་སྐྱོབས་ཤིག དེང་སླན་ཆོད་
བདག་ཅག་སྲོག་ལ་བབས་ཀྱང་སྡིག་ཏོ་དང་ཆོམ་པོའི་ལས་མི་བགྱིད་དོ། ཞེས་སོ།
སྐབས་དེར་ཡ་མཚན་རབ་རྒྱས་པའི། ། ཡུལ་དེ་གསལ་བར་བྱེད་པ་བཞིན། །
འཆར་ཁ་འོད་ཀྱི་དྲ་བ་ནི། ། ཤར་གྱི་ཕྱོགས་ནས་རྣམ་པར་མཛེས། །ཁེངས་ལྡན་
ཀུནྡའི་བཞད་གད་ཀྱིས། ། སྐྱེངས་པའི་མིག་ཟུམ་འདམ་སྐྱེས་རྣམས། ། དབུགས་
འབྱིན་བྱེད་པའི་འཕྲིན་ཡིག་དག །གསེར་གྱི་སྨྱུ་གུས་འབྲི་བ་བཞིན། ། དེ་ནས་
མེ་ཤེལ་ནོར་བུ་ཡི། ། ཁང་པ་བརྩེགས་པ་རབ་འབར་ཞིང་། ། འོད་ཟེར་སྟོང་ཕྲག་
འཁོར་གྱིས་ནི། ། ཡོངས་བསྐོར་ཉིན་མོའི་དབང་ཕྱུག་ཤར། ། པད་མོའི་འབྱུང་
གནས་དགའ་བསྐྱེད་ཅིང་། ། མི་རྣམས་ལོངས་སྤྱོད་བགྱི་བའི་སླད། ། འཇིག་རྟེན་
ཀུན་གྱི་དབང་གྱུར་པ། ། སྐྱེ་འགྲོའི་མིག་གཅིག་མངོན་པར་གསལ། ། རྫུ་འཕྲུལ་
ཆེ་ཞིང་མཐུ་སྟོབས་ལྡན། ། ཚ་ཟེར་འབར་བས་སྲེག་བྱེད་ཅིང་། ། རྣོ་བའི་མཚོན་
ཚོགས་རབ་སྤྲོ་བས། ། གཟི་བརྗིད་ཕུང་པོ་མཚན་མོའི་དགྲ། ། དེ་མཐོང་མཚན་
མོ་རྒྱུ་བ་དང༌། ། མུན་པའི་དམག་དཔུང་མཉམ་དུ་བྲོས། ། སྣང་བྱེད་ཚོགས་ཀྱི་
སྐལ་པ་དང་། ། ཀུནྡའི་ཁེངས་པ་ལྷན་ཅིག་བཅོམ། ། དེ་ཚེ་སྡིག་དང་མུན་པ་ཞི་
ཞིང་མཚན་མོ་རྒྱུ་དང་ཆོམ་རྐུན་སྐྱེངས་པར་བྱས། ། བ་མོས་ཟུམ་པའི་ཆུ་སྐྱེས་
ཚོགས་དང་ཞགས་པ་བཅིངས་པའི་སྐྱེ་བོ་ལྷན་ཅིག་གྲོལ། ། དཔལ་ལྡན་འོད་ཟེར་
སྟོང་ཕྲག་ཅན་དང་བསོད་ནམས་རྫོགས་པའི་མཐུ་ནི་རྨད་བྱུང་ཞེས། ། ཡ་མཚན་
མང་པོའི་སྣང་བ་རྒྱས་པས་སྐྱེ་འགྲོ་སྦྲང་རྩི་སྤྱོད་རྣམས་དར་དིར་སྒྲོག ། དེ་ལྟར་
ཆོམ་རྐུན་དེ་དག་སྡིག་པའི་རྩོམ་པ་དོར་ལ་ངོ་མཚར་བའི་བདུད་རྩིས་ཚིམ་པར་གྱུར་
པ་མཐོང་བས། སྐྱེས་བུ་ཆེན་པོ་དག་ཀྱང་མགུ་ཞིང་ཡིད་བདེ་བར་གྱུར་ནས་སྤུན་
རྣམས་འགྲོགས་ཏེ་རང་གི་གྲགས་པས་ཡོངས་སུ་གང་བའི་ཡུལ་རྣམས་སུ་རྒྱུ་ཞིང་
43



པ
།
མི
ན
::,
,
,
--
:
! ::E
:
:
:
-
-
"
. ", 1:
བ
,
-
"
",
-
1-
s
-r
+A
བདག་ཉིད་ཀྱི་གནས་སུ་སོང་ངོ་། བསོད་ནམས་རྒྱ་ཆེན་དཔག་ཡས་དཀའ་ཐུབ་
བང་རིམ་མཐོ་ཞིང་དགེ་ལེགས་སུམ་རྩེན་ཚོགས་ཀྱི་རྟེན། ། ལེགས་བྱས་ཆུ་གཏེར་
དབུས་གནས་དེས་པའི་རོལ་མཚོ་ རབ་ དྭངས་བརྟུལ་ཞུགས་ རི་བདུན་དག་གིས་
བསྐོར། ། གནོད་པའི་གླང་པོས་མི་གཡོ་ཁོང་ཁྲོའི་འདམ་རྫབ་བྲལ་ཞིང་སྡིག་པའི་
ངམ་གྲོག་རྣམས་ལས་དབེན། ། གྲགས་པའི་ནམ་མཁར་མངོན་འཕགས་བཟོད་
པའི་ལྷུན་པོ་དེ་ཡི་ཡ་མཚན་བརྗོད་ཀྱིས་ག་ལ་ལང་། ། དེ་ལྟར་ལུས་ཅན་རྣམས་
ནད་སྣ་ཚོགས་ཀྱི་འབྱུང་གནས་ཡིན་པ་དང་། ཁོང་ཁྲོའི་ཉེས་པ་བསྟན་པ་དང་།
བདག་ཉིད་ཆེན་པོ་ནི་ གནོད་པ་དང་སྡུག་བསྔལ་བ་ལ་སྐྱོ་བ་དང་འཁྲུགས་པའི་
སེམས་མེད་ཅིང་དགྲ་ལའང་ཕན་པར་བྱེད་པའོ་ཞེས་བཟོད་པའི་རང་བཞིན་རྨད་
དུ་བྱུང་ བ་ཡོངས་ སུ་ བརྗོད་ པ་ལའང་སྦྱར་བར་བྱའོ། ། རབ་ ཏུ་ བྱེད་ པ་ བཞི་
པའོ། །་ །



རབ་བྱེད་ལྔ་པ་སྐྱེས་ཆེན་གྱི་བརྩོན་
འགྲུས་ལ་བསྔགས་པ།
དེ་ནས་དགུན་གྱི་དུས་བྱུང་བར་གྱུར་ཏེ། དེ་ཚེ་དགུན་ཟླ་ཤིན་ཏུ་བསིལ་བ་
ཡི། ། དུས་ཀྱི་རླུང་གཡབ་བྱེད་པོས་སྤྲུལ་བ་བྱུང༌། ། དེ་དང་ཡང་ཡང་འགྲོགས་
པས་ཡིད་གཅུགས་བཞིན། ། ཁ་བའི་ཕུང་པོས་ཕྱོགས་ཀུན་ཁྱབ་པར་བྱས། །
འཁྱགས་པས་ཡན་ལག་འཁུམས་ཏེ་རབ་ལྷུང་བའི། ། སྐར་ཕྲེང་སྤུ་གྲིའི་རླུང་གིས་
གཙུབས་པ་ཡིས། ། ཕྱེ་མར་བརླགས་ཏེ་ས་ལ་བབས་པ་ནི། ། མེ་ཏོག་དཀར་པོ་
གཏོར་བའི་ཚུལ་བཞིན་མཛེས། ། ས་འཛིན་སྔོ་ལྗང་གོས་བྲལ་གཅེར་བུ་ཉིད། །
མཛེས་པ་མི་མཐོང་དུས་ཀྱི་དགའ་མ་ཡིས། ། ཡུལ་གྱི་མཛའ་བོ་དྭངས་བར་བགྱི་
བའི་སླད། ། དར་དཀར་གོས་ཀྱིས་འགེབས་པར་བྱེད་པ་བཞིན། ། གྲང་རེག་མི་
བཟོད་མི་རྣམས་རེ་བ་ཡིས། ། གང་དུ་ཉི་སེར་སྣང་བར་འབུངས་ཤིང་འཁོད། །
དྲོད་སྐྱེས་མ་ནུས་ཚ་ཟེར་སྐྱེངས་པ་ཡིས། ། རིངས་པའི་ཤུགས་ཀྱིས་མྱུར་དུ་འབྲོས་
པ་བཞིན། ། དེ་མཐོང་རེ་ཐག་ཆད་ཅིང་ཞུམ་གྱུར་པའི། ། ཆུ་ཀླུང་རྒྱུན་རྣམས་རྒྱུ་
བ་རབ་བཅད་དེ། ། ས་ཡི་འོག་ཏུ་བྲོས་ཤིང་བྲག་རི་ཡི། །གཟུགས་སུ་བསྒྱུར་ཏེ་
ཟོལ་གྱིས་གནས་པ་བཞིན། ། དེ་ལྟར་གྱུར་པའི་ཚེ་ཡང་གཞོན་ནུ་དག་ཡུལ་གཞན་
ཞིག་ཏུ་འགྲོ་བར་འདོད་ནས་བྱང་ཕྱོགས་སུ་ཕྱིན་ཏེ་ཉི་མ་འགའ་ཞིག་འདས་པ་དང༌།
རིའི་ངོགས་ཀྱི་དུར་ཁྲོད་རབ་ཏུ་མི་བཟད་པ་ཞིག་དང་ཉེ་བར་ཕྱིན་ཏོ། ། དེ་ཉིད་
ན་རོ་བསྲེགས་པའི་དུ་བས་ནི་རབ་ཏུ་དཀྲིགས། གཉེན་འདུན་གྱི་སྐྱེ་བོ་ངུ་བ་དང་།
བྱ་རྒོད་དང་། ཁྱི་དང་། ཅེ་སྤྱང་གི་སྒྲ་རྣམ་པ་དུ་མ་ནི་གྲག རོ་རྣམ་པར་བམ་པ་
དང༌། རྣམ་པར་མྱགས་པ་དང་། ཀེང་རུས་ཀྱི་ཕུང་པོས་ནི་ས་གཞི་ཡོངས་སུ་གང་
སྟེ་འཇིགས་འཇིགས་ལྟར་འདུག་པ་མཐོང་ནས། ཕུ་བོ་གསུམ་ནི་ཤིན་ཏུ་སྐྲགས་
45



ཞོ་
བ
ཤིང་སེམས་བློང་བློང་པོར་གྱུར་ཏེ། གཞོན་ནུ་འདོད་ལྷའི་བུས་གྲོགས་དག་ལ་སྨྲས་
པ། ཀྱེ་མ། དེ་རིང་གཤིན་རྗེས་ཁྲིད་དམ་ཡི་དྭགས་འགའ་ཡིས་བསླུས་སམ་རང་
ཉིད་མྱོས་ཏེ་འཁྱམས་གྱུར་ཏམ། ། འདི་འདྲ་ཅི་ཞིག་སྲུལ་པོའམ་སྲིན་པོའི་གྲོང་
ཁྱེར་ཉིད་དམ་དམྱལ་བ་ཞེས་ པ་འདི་འམ་ ཅི། ། རང་དབང་ལྡན་ན་ མྱུར་དུ་
འཇིགས་པ་འདི་ལས་བྲོས་ཏེ་རང་གི་གནས་སུ་འཇུག་པར་རིགས། ། རྨི་ལམ་དུ་
ཡང་སྡིག་ པ་ འདི་ འདྲ་ སླན་ཆད་ནམ་ ཡང་ མིག་ གིས་ མཐོང་ བར་མ་ གྱུར་ ཅིག།
གཞོན་ནུ་ལེགས་པའི་བློ་གྲོས་ཀྱིས་སྨྲས་པ། འཆི་བ་ཞེས་འདི་སྲོག་ཆགས་ཀུན། །
ངེས་པར་འཇོམས་པའི་མཚོན་ཆ་ཡིན། །གཤིན་རྗེའི་ཁ་ནི་འཇིགས་རུང་བ། །
འདི་ཡིས་མི་འཇོམས་སུ་ཞིག་ཡོད། ། དང་པོ་སྐྱེས་པའི་སྐད་ཅིག་ནས། ། འཆི་བ་
ཁོ་ན་ཆས་སུ་བྱས། ། རྒ་དང་ན་བའི་ལམ་བགྲོད་དེ། ། འཆི་བདག་གནས་སུ་
མངོན་པར་འགྲོ། ། སྟོབས་ཀྱིས་བཟློག་པར་བྱ་བ་འམ། ། ནོར་དང་ཐབས་ཀྱིས་
བླུ་བ་འམ། ། གཡོ་སྒྱུ་མཁས་པ་གང་གིས་ཀྱང་། ། སྐད་ཅིག་བཤོལ་བར་ནུས་པ་
མེད། ། གཉེན་འདུན་དུ་བས་མཐའ་སྐོར་ཞིང༌། ། མགྲིན་པའི་དབུགས་ནི་བརྒྱུད་
མར་བརྩེགས། ། འཕྲལ་དུ་ལུས་འདི་འདོར་བའི་ཚེ། ། རང་དབང་ཅུང་ཟད་ཡོད་
མ་ཡིན། ། ཤིན་ ཏུ་མཐོ་བའི་རི་བོའི་ཟོམ་དུ་བྲོས་ སམ་ དཔག་ བསམ་ ཤིང་རྩེ་
འམ། ། གཏིང་དཔག་དཀའ་བའི་རྒྱུ་མཚོའི་ནང་དུ་གབ་བམ་དབེན་པའི་བས་
མཐའ་འམ། ། རྡོ་རྗེས་བརྩིགས་པའི་ར་བར་ཡིབ་སྟེ་འདུག་ཀྱང་འཆི་ལས་ཐར་
མིན་ཏེ། ། ཚངས་སོགས་ལྷ་ཆེན་དག་ཀྱང་རང་ཉིད་འཆི་འགྱུར་སྐྱོབ་ནུས་སུ་ཡང་
མེད། ། འཇིག་རྟེན་འདི་ན་དངོས་གང་སྐྱེས་ནས་འཇིག་པར་མི་འགྱུར་ཅི་ཞིག་
ཡོད་པ་སྨོས། ། དུས་ཀྱི་རྒྱ་མཚོ་ཆུ་ཐིགས་ཙམ་འགྱུར་ལྷུན་པོ་རྡུལ་ཕྲན་ལྷག་མར་
འགྱུར་བ་སྟེ། ། ཡོངས་འདུའི་ལྗོན་པ་ཐལ་བར་བྱེད་ཅིང་འཇིག་རྟེན་ཐམས་ཅད་
ནམ་མཁའ་ཉིད་དུ་འགྱུར། ། སྐྱེས་པ་འཆི་ཞིང་འདུས་པ་ཀུན་བྲལ་བསགས་པ་
ཡོངས་འཛད་རྟག་པ་འགའ་ཡང་མེད། ། དེ་ནས་ གཞོན་ནུ་དགེ་བ་ཅན་གྱིས་
གྲོགས་དག་སྐྱོ་བ་བསྐྱེད་པའི་ཕྱིར་དུར་ཁྲོད་ཀྱི་ནང་དུ་ཁྲིད་དེ། རོ་རྣམ་འགྱུར་མི་
46



སྡུག་ཅིང་སྐྱི་བུང་བྱེད་པ་དུ་མ་དག་རིམ་གྱིས་ལྟར་བཅུག་ནས་སྨྲས་པ། ཀྱི་ཧུད་སྐྱེ་
བོའི་དུས་མཐའ་འཇིགས་རུང་ལྟོས། ། སྙིང་པོ་མེད་ཅིང་བྱས་པ་མི་གཟོ་བའི། །
ལུས་འདི་ནམ་ཞིག་ངེས་པར་བསླུ་བ་ཉིད། ། གསོ་དང་སྲུང་བ་དོན་མེད་ངལ་བར་
ཟད། ། སྔོན་ཚེ་རིན་ཆེན་ཅོད་པན་རབ་ བཅིངས་ གླ་ རྩིའི་ དོག་ པས་ཡང་དག་
བྱུགས། ། ཅུང་ཟད་བསྒྱུར་བས་གསེར་གྱི་རྣ་རྒྱུན་ཕན་ཚུན་སིལ་ཞེས་བསྒྱུར་བྱེད་
པ། ། འདིར་ནི་ ཁྲག་ དང༌ ཐལ་ བས་ བྱུགས་ ཤིང་ རྡུལ་ ཆགས་ སྐུ་ ནི་ སེར་ སྐྱར་
གྱུར། ། ཁྱི་རྣམས་ཉལ་བའི་ལག་པའི་བར་ན་ རིལ་རིལ་འགྲེ་ལྡོག་གནས་པར་
བྱེད། ། ལྷ་ ཡི་ གོས་ཀྱིས་རོ་སྟོད་ལེགས་ གཡོགས་ རས་དཀར་འཇམ་ པས་སྨད་
དཀྲིས་ལ། ། མུ་ཏིག་དོ་ཤལ་ནོར་བུའི་འོད་ཀྱིས་པགས་པའི་མདངས་དཀར་རྣམ་
གསལ་བ། ། དེ་ རིང་ རོ་ རས་ རུལ་ ཞིང༌ རྩུབ་ མོ་ ཁ་ དོག་ ནག་ པོ་ ཅུང་ ཞིག་
གཡོགས། ། རྩྭ་ཡི་ཞགས་པས་མཁྲིག་མ་རབ་བཅིངས་རྡོ་བ་རྣམས་ལ་གནས་ཏེ་
འདུག ། ཆུ་ཡིས་ལུས་བཀྲུས་མར་གསར་ལེགས་བྱུགས་ཚ་གྲང་གནོད་པས་མི་རེག་
ལ། ། སེང་གེའི་ཁྲི་ལ་བདེ་བར་ཉལ་ཞིང་བུད་མེད་རེག་པས་ཚིམ་གྱུར་པ། ། དེང༌
འདིར་ཀླད་པ་ཆུ་སེར་རབ་ཟགས་གཅེར་བུར་ས་གཞིའི་ངོས་སུ་འགྱེལ། ། ཅེ་སྤྱང་
དྲེགས་པས་མཆེ་རྣོན་དྲག་བཏབ་ཤ་རུས་ཕྱོགས་བཅུར་འཐོར་བར་གྱུར། ། ལང་
ཚོས་རྣམ་དྲེགས་ཁེངས་པ་རྒྱས་ཤིང་འགྱིང་བག་ལྡན་པས་ཀུན་ཏུ་རྒྱུ། ། གཞོན་ཤ་
རབ་ཆགས་ནུ་འབུར་མཛེས་ལྡན་མཚང་རའི་ཁྱོན་གྱི་ཁུར་འཛིན་མ། ། ད་ནི་ཤ་
རྣམས་ལྷག་མ་མེད་བྱས་རྩ་རྒྱུས་བྲལ་ལ་ལྷ་བ་བསྐམས། ། ཀེང་རུས་འདི་འདྲ་ལུས་
ཅན་རྣམས་ལ་སུན་འབྱིན་དངོས་སུ་སྟོན་བྱེད་བཞིན། ། གཞོན་ནུ་མཉེས་གཤིན་
བཟང་པོས་སྨྲས་པ། ཡུན་རིང་དུས་ནས་གཅེས་པར་བཟུང༌། ། ཟས་དང་གོས་ཀྱི་
མགྲོན་དུ་གཉེར། ། རྟག་པར་འཛིན་པའི་ལུས་བོར་ནས། ། རྨོངས་པའི་སེམས་དེ་
གང་དུ་སོང་། ། གཉེན་ཞེས་འཁྲུལ་པས་ཆགས་ཆགས་ནས། ། ཅུང་ཟད་གནོད་
པའང་མི་བཟོད་པའི། ། ཕངས་པ་དེ་འདིར་བས་མཐའ་རུ། ། ཀྱེ་མ་ཁྲེལ་མེད་
རྣམས་ཀྱིས་དོར། ། སྡུག་དང་མི་སྡུག་སྐྱེ་བོ་ལ། ། སྡང་མིག་མཚོན་དང་ཆགས་པ་



ལྟས༌དr9F་གསam
ས་•ཁjས་དམ་ལ་
བསགཝཀunr
filinifl ifutur'Infir*r°ri*drwl**ifYPRAfirriil 1hirfilin**Firiir*#*། *%i***ra*#l*filfa+tl8%B3%
8
2
%4,
4:11FzE
:22%739397821
7
#g
ཡི། ། ཟུར་གྱིས་ལྟ་བྱེད་མིག་དེ་གཉིས། ། ཁྭ་ཡིས་བཏོན་ཏེ་མཁའ་ལ་ཁྱེར། ། སོ་
རྩི་དམར་བ་དྲི་བཟང་ལྡན། ། བིམ་པ་ལྟར་འཇམ་མཆུ་དེ་ཡང་། ། དགའ་མའི་
མཆུ་མཛེས་བཏང་ནས་དེང༌། ། ཁྱི་དང་ཁ་ནི་སྦྱོར་བར་བྱེད། ། ལྕེ་འདིས་མི་
བཟད་རྫུན་དང་ནི། ། ཚིག་རྩུབ་གཡོ་སྒྱུའི་ཚིག་སྨྲས་ཞེས། ། ཁྲོས་པ་ཧཱུཾ་སྒྲོག་འུག་
པ་ཡི། ། མཆུ་ཡིས་གྲེ་བའི་ཕུག་ནས་འདོན། ། ལུས་ཁྱོད་གསོ་བའི་ཆེད་ཙམ་
དུ། ། སྡིག་དང་གནོད་པ་དུ་མ་བྱས། །ཞེས་ཏེ་ཁྲི་དང་བྱ་རྒོད་རྣམས། །ལུས་
ཕྲལ་སྙིང་ཡང་ཟ་བར་བྱེད། ། རོ་རྣམས་འབར་བའི་མེས་སྲེག་ཅིང་། །དུ་བས་
རབ་དཀྲིགས་ཅིལ་ཅིལ་སྒྲོག ། སེམས་དེའང་མི་བཟད་སྡིག་པའི་མེས། ། དམྱལ་
བའི་གནས་ན་སྲེག་པར་ངེས། ། ལུས་ཀྱི་གཞི་ལ་སྡུག་བསྔལ་དང་། ། ལས་ཚུལ་རི་
མོ་རྣམ་པར་བཀྲ། ། མངོན་སུམ་གྱུར་ཀྱང་མི་ཤེས་པ། ། ཀྱི་ཧུད་རང་ཉིད་བསླུས་
པར་ཟད། ། དེ་སྐད་ཅེས་སྨྲས་པ་དང་། ཕུ་བོ་གསུམ་ཡང་ཤིན་ཏུ་ཡིད་སྐྱོ་བར་
གྱུར་ཏེ་ནུ་བོ་གསུམ་པོ་ག་ལ་བ་དེར་འགྲོ་ཞིང་། བདག་རྣམས་སྔོན་ཆད་མི་ཤེས་པ་
དང་ང་རྒྱལ་གྱིས་བཅིངས་ཏེ་རྟག་ཏུ་ཕན་པར་བྱེད་པ་ཁྱེད་ཅག་གི་བདེན་པའི་ཚིག་
རྣར་མི་སྙན་ཞིང་མ་གུས་པར་གྱུར་པ་དེ་དག་བཟོད་པར་མཛོད་ལ། དེང་སླན་
ཆད་མཁས་པའི་སྐྱེ་བོའི་རྗེས་སུ་འཇུག་ཅིང་སློབ་མ་བཞིན་གནས་པར་བྱ་ཡི། ཁྱེད་
ཅག་གིས་ཅི་ནས་འཁོར་བ་མི་རྟག་པ་དང་སྡུག་བསྔལ་བ་འདི་ལྟ་བུ་ལས་བཟློག་པར་
འགྱུར་བའི་ལམ་བསྟན་དུ་གསོལ། ཞེས་སོ། ། གཞོན་ནུ་ལེགས་པའི་བློ་གྲོས་ཀྱིས་
ཀྱང་དེ་དག་ལ་ལེགས་སོ་ཞེས་བྱ་བ་བྱིན་ཏེ་སྤུན་རྣམས་ལེགས་སོ་ལེགས་སོ། ཁོ་བོ་
ཅག་གིས་ ཐོག་མ་ནས་ཁྱེད་ཅག་ལ་ཕན་པ་དང་བདེ་བར་སེམས་ཀྱང་ཁྱེད་ཅག་
རྒྱགས་པ་དང་ང་རྒྱལ་གྱི་དུག་གིས་སྦགས་པས། ལེགས་པར་བཤད་པའི་བདུད་
རྩིའི་སྣོད་དུ་མ་གྱུར་གྱི། ད་ནི་འཁོར་བའི་སྐྱོན་འདི་ལྟ་བུ་མངོན་སུམ་དུ་མཐོང་
ཞིང་དགེ་བའི་ལམ་ལ་འཇུག་པར་འདོད་པ་ནི་ཤིན་ཏུ་ལེགས་སོ། དེའི་ཕྱིར་ལེགས་
པར་འགྱུར་བའི་གནས་རིམ་གྱིས་བསྟན་གྱི་ཚུར་ཤོག་ ཅེས་ཏེ་རེ་ཞིག་ཚིགས་སུ་
བཅད་པས་ཀྱང་སྨྲས་པ། གྲོགས་དག་ལེགས་སོ་དེ་རིང་དམ་པའི་གནས་ལ་འཇུག་



པར་འདོད་པ་ལེགས། ། ལས་དང་ཉོན་མོངས་སྐྱེ་རྒ་ན་འཆིའི་སྡུག་བསྔལ་རང་
བཞིན་འཁོར་བ་སྟེ། །རབ་ ཏུ་ ཞི་ བ་ མྱ་ངན་ ལས་འདས་ བདེ་ བ་ དེ་ ནི་བླ་ན་
མེད། ། སྦྱིན་དང་ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས་བཟོད་བརྩོན་ཏིང་འཛིན་ཤེས་རབ་ངེས་པར་འབྱུང་
བའི་ལམ། ། དེ་དག་མང་དུ་ཐོས་པའི་ནོར་དང་བསོད་ནམས་རྒྱ་ཆེན་གཏེར་ལས་
འབྱུང་། ། དེ་ཡང་དགེ་བའི་བཤེས་གཉེན་བསྟེན་དང་དཀོན་མཆོག་མཆོད་པའི་
དགེ་བ་ལས། ། ཐོབ་པ་ཉིད་ཕྱིར་མངོན་པར་དགའ་བའི་གཙུག་ལག་ཁང་ཆེན་
གང་ན་བར། ། ཐམས་ཅད་མཁྱེན་པའི་བཤེས་གཉེན་མཁས་པ་དེ་དུང་མྱུར་དུ་
འདོང་བ་རིགས། ། ཞེས་སྨྲས་ཏེ་ས་ཕྱོགས་དེ་ནས་དཔག་ཚད་ལྔ་འདས་པ་ལས་
མངོན་པར་དགའ་བ་ཞེས་བྱ་བའི་གཙུག་ལག་ཁང་ན་བདག་ཉིད་ཆེན་པོ་ཐམས་
ཅད་མཁྱེན་པའི་བཤེས་གཉེན་ཞེས་བྱ་བ་གནས་པ་དེ་ཉིད་ག་ལ་བ་དེར་འགྲོ་བར་
བྱེད་དོ། ། སྐབས་དེར་ནུ་བོ་གསུམ་ནི་སྐྱེ་བོ་འགའ་ཞིག་ལ་ཕན་པའི་ཆེད་དུ་བསྟི་
གནས་ཤིག་ན་ངལ་བསོ་སྟེ་འདུག་པ་དང་། ཕུ་བོ་གསུམ་སྔོན་ལ་ཐལ་ཏེ་སོང་བས།
ལམ་དང་ཉེ་བ་ཞིག་ན་དབང་ཕྱུག་མཆོད་པའི་ལྷ་ཁང་མུ་སྟེགས་དུ་མས་གང་བ་ཞིག་
འདུག་པ་མཐོང་སྟེ། གཞོན་ནུ་མུན་པ་ཅན་གྱིས་བསམས་པ། ཨེ་མ། མངོན་
པར་ དགའ་ བའི་ གཙུག་ལག་ ཁང་ཞེས་ པ་ དེ་ འདིའོ། ཞེས་ ཏེ་ དེར་ སོང་ནས།
དབང་ཕྱུག་གི་རྟེན་སྐྱེས་པའི་མཚན་མ་གྱེན་དུ་སྒྲེང་བ་གསེར་གྱིས་བྱུགས་པ་དག་ལ་
ཕྱག་འཚལ་ཞིང་། མུ་སྟེགས་ཀྱི་འཁོར་དང་བཅས་པ་ལ་མཆོད་པ་བྱེད་དོ། ། དེ་
ལྟར་གྱུར་པ་ནུ་བོ་གསུམ་གྱིས་རིག་ནས་རིངས་པ་རིངས་པར་བསྙེགས་ཏེ། ལྷ་ཁང་
དེར་ཕྱིན་པ་དང༌། མུན་པ་ཅན་གྱིས་སྨྲས་པ། གྲོགས་པོ་དག་དཀོན་མཆོག་གི་
རྟེན་ལ་ཕྱག་འཚལ་བར་མི་བྱེད་དམ། གཞོན་ནུ་ལེགས་པའི་བློ་གྲོས་ཀྱིས་སྨྲས་པ།
འདི་ནི་དཀོན་མཆོག་མ་ཡིན་གྱི། འཇིག་རྟེན་གྱི་ལྷ་དབང་ཕྱུག་ཆེན་པོ་སྟེ་ཕྱག་
དང་མཆོད་པའི་གནས་མ་ཡིན་ན། ཕྱིར་ཤོག་ཅིག་ཅེས་སྨྲས་པ་དང་། མུ་སྟེགས་
དེ་དག་ཧ་ཅང་མ་རངས་ཏེ་རྒོལ་བར་འདོད་དེ་སྨྲས་པ། ཅི་བླུན་པོ་བབ་ཅོལ་དུ་སྨྲ་
ཞིང་མ་རུངས་པ་ཁྱོད་ཅག་འཇིག་རྟེན་གྱི་ལྷ་ཆེན་པོ་ལ་ཡང་དམོད་པར་བྱེད་དམ།



གཞོན་ནུ་ལེགས་པའི་བློ་གྲོས་ཀྱིས་དེ་ལྟ་ན་ནི་བདག་གིས་མངོན་སུམ་དུ་བྱའོ་ཞེས་ཏེ།
དབང་ཕྱུག་གི་རྟེན་ལ་ལག་པས་བྱུགས་ནས་སྨྲས་པ། སྲིད་གསུམ་བླ་མ་ཆོས་ཀྱི་
རྒྱལ་པོ་ཐུབ་དབང་མཆོག་དེ་མི་ཤེས་སམ། ། སྲིད་ལས་མ་གྲོལ་སྡུག་བསྔལ་བཅས་
ཁྱོད་དེ་ཡི་འབངས་ཉིད་མིན་ནམ་ཅི། ། རྒྱལ་བའི་སྲས་པོ་དཔའ་བོ་སེང་གེ་འདི་
ལྟར་མངོན་སུམ་འོངས་བཞིན་དུ། ། རྨོངས་པའི་དྲེགས་ལྡན་ཝ་སྐྱེས་ཁྱོད་ལྟ་སྤྱི་
བོས་འདུད་པར་མི་བྱེད་ཅི། ། ཞེས་སྨྲས་མ་ཐག་ཏུ་དབང་ཕྱུག་གི་རྟེན་དེ་ས་ལ་
ལྷུང་ནས། གཞོན་ནུ་དག་གི་རྐང་པ་ལ་གཏུགས་སོ། སྙིང་རྗེའི་སྟོབས་ལྡན་བདེན་
ཚིག་རལ་གྲིས་ང་རྒྱལ་འདབ་ལྡན་ལོག་ལྟ་ཡི། ། བྱ་ཚོགས་རྟེན་གྱུར་རྨོངས་པའི་
རྐང་འཐུང་ཁེངས་པའི་རྩ་བ་རབ་བཅད་དེ། ། དབང་ཕྱུག་ལྗོན་ཤིང་མུ་སྟེགས་
ཚོགས་རྣམས་མ་རངས་འཕྱར་བའི་དྲེགས་པ་དང་། ། མགོ་བོའི་ཅོད་པན་ལྷན་
ཅིག་ལྷུང་བས་རྐང་མཐིལ་སོར་མོ་མཛེས་པར་བྱས། ། དེ་ལྟར་མུ་སྟེགས་ལྷ་དང་
བཅས་པ་ཕམ་པར་བྱས་ནས་སྤུན་རྣམས་འགྲོགས་ཏེ། མངོན་པར་དགའ་བའི་
གཙུག་ལག་ཁང་དང་ཉེ་བར་ཕྱིན་ཏོ། དེ་ནས་གྲོང་ཁྱེར་ཡངས་པའི་དབུས། །
སྐྱེད་ཚལ་རྣམས་ཀྱིས་ཡོངས་བསྐོར་བ། ། རིན་ཆེན་རྩིག་པ་རབ་བརྟན་ཅིང་། །
བྱུ་རུའི་ཀ་བ་གསལ་ཞིང་མཛེས། །.གསེར་གྱི་དྲ་བས་རྣམ་སྤྲས་པའི། ། འོད་ཀྱིས་
ཕྱོགས་ཀུན་འགེངས་བྱེད་པ། ། ནམ་ཡང་སྐྱོ་བ་མེད་པ་ཡི། ། མངོན་པར་དགའ་
བའི་གཞལ་མེད་མཐོང་། ། བ་གམ་ཨིན་ཌ་རྙིལ་ གྱི་འོད། ། སྔོ་བསངས་ནམ་
མཁའི་གོས་ཕྲོགས་ནས། ། ནོར་བུའི་ཏོག་ནི་རབ་འབར་བས། ། རྟ་བདུན་མུན་
པར་བྱེད་པ་བཞིན། ། དེ་ལྟ་བུའི་གཙུག་ལག་ཁང་དེའི་སྒོ་ཁང་ན་འཇིག་རྟེན་གྱི་
བྱེད་པོ་ཚངས་པ་དང་། ལྷ་ཡི་རྒྱལ་པོ་བརྒྱ་བྱིན་དང༌། འཇིག་རྟེན་སྐྱོང་བ་བཞིའི་
གཟུགས་གནས་པ་ལས། གཞོན་ནུ་མུན་པ་ཅན་དེས་དེ་དག་ལ་ཕྱག་འཚལ་ཞིང་
གྲོགས་དག་ལ་སྨྲས་པ། སྲིད་གསུམ་མེས་པོ་འཕྲོག་བྱེད་ནི། ། འཇིག་རྟེན་སྐྱོང་
བཅས་འདིར་བཞུགས་ན། ། ཕྱག་དང་མཆོད་པ་མི་བྱེད་པར། ། སྐྱབས་གནས་སུ་
ཞིག་གཞན་དུ་འཚོལ། ། གཞོན་ནུ་དགེ་བ་ཅན་གྱིས་སྨྲས་པ། བསོད་ནམས་
ལ
:



4
,
༣
་ ，
དྲེགས་བཅས་སྲིད་ལས་མ་གྲོལ་ལྷ་ཆེན་འདི་དག་ཕྱག་འོས་མིན། ། ལྷ་ཡི་ལྷ་མཆོག་
སྲིད་ལས་རྣམ་རྒྱལ་ཐུབ་དབང་སྲས་བཅས་ཕྱག་བྱར་འོས། ། འདི་དག་ཀུན་ཀྱང་
བླ་མ་དེ་ཡི་ཆབ་སྒོ་སྲུང་བརྩོན་གནས་པ་ཉིད། ། འཇིག་རྟེན་འདྲེན་པ་མཆོད་པའི་
ཡུལ་དེ་གཞལ་མེད་ཁང་བཞུགས་བལྟ་ཕྱིར་འདོང་། ། དེ་སྐད་སྨྲས་ནས། གཙུག་
ལག་ཁང་གི་ནང་དུ་ཕྱིན་པ་དང༌། བཅོམ་ལྡན་འདས་ཀྱི་སྐུ་གསེར་གྱི་རི་བོ་ལྟར་
དཔལ་ནི་རབ་ཏུ་འབར། མཚན་དང་དཔེ་བྱད་རྣམས་ཀྱིས་ནི་བརྒྱན། ཉི་མ་བརྒྱ་
བས་ལྷག་པའི་གཟི་བརྗིད་ནི་རབ་ཏུ་གསལ། པདྨ་དང་སེང་གེའི་ཁྲི་ལ་ལྷམ་མེ་
ལྷང་ངེ་ལྷན་ནེར་བཞུགས་པ་མཐོང་ངོ༌། གཟི་བརྗིད་མཚུངས་པ་མེད་པ་དེ་མཐོང་
ནས། ། ཐལ་མོ་སྦྱར་ཞིང་སྤྱི་བོས་ཕྱག་ཀྱང་འཚལ། ། རྒྱལ་བའི་འཕྲིན་ལས་ཉི་
ཟེར་རབ་སྤྲོས་པས། ། ལག་ པའི་ཀུ་མུད་ཟུམ་པར་གྱུར་པ་བཞིན། ། ཞབས་
མཐིལ་དམར་བའི་ཆུ་སྐྱེས་སྤྱི་བོར་བཀོད། ། ནོར་བུས་མཚན་པའི་ཅོད་པན་
སྐྱེངས་པར་བྱས། ། དད་དང་ངེས་འབྱུང་འགྲན་བཞིན་རྣམས་རྒྱས་པས། །
འདོད་སྲེད་ཐ་བའི་སེམས་ནི་རིང་དུ་བསྐྲད། ། རྨད་བྱུང་བྱིན་རླབས་ཟེར་གྱིས་
སྡིག་པའི་སེམས། ། བཞུ་བར་འགྱུར་བཞིན་མཆི་མའི་ཆུ་རྒྱུན་ཟགས། ། དད་པའི་
ཀླུ་དབང་གིས་བསྐུལ་མཁྱེན་བརྩེ་ཡི། ། སྤྱན་སྤྲིན་ལས་ནི་ཐུགས་རྗེའི་ཆར་ཟིམ་
བབས། ། དེ་ལྟར་གཞོན་ནུ་དེ་དག་བཅོམ་ལྡན་འདས་ཀྱི་དྲུང་དུ་འདུག་སྟེ་ཨུཏྤལ་
དང་། པུཎྜ་རཱི་ཀ་ལ་སོགས་མེ་ཏོག་རྣམ་པ་སྣ་ཚོགས་པ་དང་། ཨ་ཀ་རུ་དང་།
ཙན་དན་སྦྲུལ་གྱི་སྙིང་པོ་ལ་སོགས་པའི་མཆོད་པ་རྣམས་ཀྱིས་མཆོད་ཅིང༌། གཞོན་
ནུ་ལེགས་པའི་བློ་གྲོས་ཀྱིས་ཚིགས་སུ་བཅད་དེ་བསྟོད་པ། གང་སྐུ་མཚན་དཔེ་
འབར་བའི་དཔལ་གྱིས་བདུད་མོའི་ཆགས་པ་ཞི་མཛད་ཅིང་། །བྱམས་པས་རབ་
དགོད་ཐུགས་རྗེའི་མཐུ་ཡིས་མེ་ཏོག་གཞུ་ཅན་དཔུང་ཚོགས་བཅོམ། ། བསམ་
གཏན་ངང་ལ་གཡོ་མེད་བཞུགས་ཚེ་སྟོང་གསུམ་རྣམ་པ་དྲུག་ཏུ་གཡོ། ། ཆགས་པ་
ཀུན་བུལ་ཐུབ་པ་མཆོག་ཁྱོད་མཆོད་སྤྲིན་རྒྱ་མཚོའི་ཚོགས་ཀྱིས་མཆོད། ། གཞོན་
ནུ་མཉེས་གཤིན་བཟང་པོས་བསྟོད་པ། འགྲོ་ཀུན་ཐར་པར་ཡོངས་སུ་འགོད་ཕྱིར་



སྲིད་པ་ཇི་སྲིད་རྟག་བཞུགས་ཤིང༌། ། ཉོན་མོངས་ཚ་གདུང་བསིལ་བར་བྱ་སླད་ཡེ་
ཤེས་མེ་ལྕེས་རྣམ་རྟོག་སྲེག ། སྲིད་པའི་འདམ་རྫབ་སྐེམ་པར་བྱ་ཞེས་ཆོས་ཀྱི་
བདུད་རྩིའི་ཆར་རྒྱུན་འབེབས། ། ཡོན་ཏན་ཡལ་འདབ་རྒྱས་པར་བྱ་ཕྱིར་འཁོར་
བའི་རྐང་འཐུང་གཅོད་པ་མཚར། ། གཞོན་ནུ་དགེ་བ་ཅན་གྱིས་ཀྱང་བསྟོད་པ།
གྲགས་པའི་དྲི་བསུང་རིང་དུ་འཕྲོ་ཞིང་གདུལ་བྱའི་ཚོགས་རྣམས་ཉེ་བར་སྡུད། །
བྱིན་རླབས་ཆུ་རྒྱུན་ཐུར་ལ་འབེབས་ཤིང་ཉམ་ཐག་སྐྱེ་བོ་གྱེན་དུ་འདྲེན། །ཀུན་ཏུ་
དམ་པའི་སྤྱོད་ལ་དགྱེས་ཤིང་དམན་པ་རྣམས་ལ་ལྷག་པར་བརྩེ། ། སྲེད་པའི་ཉེས་
བརྒྱ་རྟག་ཏུ་སྟོན་ཅིང་ཞི་ལ་མི་གནས་ཁྱོད་ལ་བསྟོད། ། ཅེས་སོ། དེ་ནས་གཡས་
ཕྱོགས་སུ་བསྐོར་ཏེ་དོང་བ་ན་གཙུག་ལག་ཁང་གཞན་ཞིག་ན་བཅོམ་ལྡན་འདས་
འཇམ་དཔལ་དབྱངས་ཀྱི་སྐུ་དབང་པོའི་གཞུ་ཡིས་ཉེ་བར་མཚན་པའི་མཚམས་སྤྲིན་
ལྟར་མཛེས་པ་མཐོང་ནས་དེ་ལ་ཕྱག་དང་མཆོད་པ་བྱས་ཏེ། གཞོན་ནུ་ལེགས་པའི་
བློ་གྲོས་ཀྱིས་བསྔགས་པ། སྲིད་པའི་འཆིང་བ་ཀུན་བཅད་ཅིང་། ། ཆོས་རྣམས་མ་
ལུས་ཐུགས་སུ་ཆུད། ། གླེགས་བམ་རལ་གྲི་རབ་འཛིན་པས། ། སླར་ཡང་ཅི་ཞིག་
མཛད་པར་དགོངས། ། འོན་ཀྱང་འགྲོ་བའི་ཉོན་མོངས་ཀུན། ། རྩད་ནས་བཅད་
དེ་རྒྱལ་བ་ཡི། ། དགོངས་པ་མཆོག་ལ་འགོད་མཛད་པ། ། ཉིད་ཀྱི་ཕྱག་མཚན་
ལྷག་པར་མཛེས། ། ཞེས་སོ། དེ་ནས་ཡང་སོང་བ་ལས། བྱང་ཕྱོགས་ཀྱི་གཙུག་
ལག་ཁང་ཞིག་ན། འཕགས་པ་འཇིག་རྟེན་དབང་ཕྱུག་གི་སྐུ་དྲང་སྲོང་གི་ཆ་བྱད་
ཅན་ཀུ་མུ་དའི་ཕུང་པོ་ལྟར་དཀར་བར་བཞུགས་པ་དེའི་དྲུང་དུ་ཕྱིན་ཏེ་ཞབས་ལ་
མགོ་བོས་གཏུགས་ཤིང་། དེའི་ཚེ་གཞོན་ནུ་མཉེས་གཤིན་བཟང་པོས་བསྔགས་པ།
དཀར་ཞིང་འོད་གསལ་དྲི་མེད་འདི། ། གངས་རིའམ་ནོར་བུ་ཆུ་ཤེལ་ཡིན། །
མཚན་དཔེ་ལྡན་པས་འདྲེན་བྱེད་ཀྱི། ། བདུད་རྩི་ཁྱོད་སྐུ་ལགས་པར་མཐོང༌། །
འགྲོ་དོན་ལ་ཆགས་ཡི་དྭགས་རྣམས། ། ཚིམ་པའི་བདེ་ལ་མཆོག་ ཏུ་སྲེད། །
འདོད་པ་ལ་སྡང་སྲིད་པ་ནི། ། རྟག་ཏུ་དགྱེས་འདིས་སྲིད་བྲལ་མིན། ། དེ་སྐད་
བསམས་ཚེ་སྙིང་རྗེའི་ཐུགས། ། བདག་གི་བདེ་ལ་ཆགས་མེད་ཅིང་། ། སྲིད་ཞི་
1:|:



མཉམ་པར་མཁྱེན་ཞེས་པས། ། འཕགས་མཆོག་ཀུན་གྱི་རྒྱལ་པོར་འཚལ། ། དེ་
ནས་ཡང་རིམ་གྱིས་དོང་བ་ལས་གཡོན་ཕྱོགས་ཀྱི་གཙུག་ལག་ཁང་ཞིག་ན། གསང་
བའི་བདག་པོ་ཕྱག་ན་རྡོ་རྗེའི་སྐུ་བཻཌཱུརྱའི་རི་བོ་ལྟར་བརྗིད་པ། གསང་བ་པ་དུ་
མས་བསྐོར་བ་མཐོང་ནས། གཞོན་ནུ་དགེ་བ་ཅན་གྱིས་ཐལ་མོ་སྦྱར་ཏེ་བསྔགས་པ།
ཁོང་ཁྲོ་སྤངས་ཀྱང་ཁྲོ་བའི་ཞལ། ། འགྲོ་བའི་ཞེ་སྡང་གཞོམ་དོན་དུ། ། སྟོང་ཉིད་
སྙིང་རྗེའི་རྡོ་རྗེ་ཡིས། ། ཉོན་མོངས་བགེགས་རྣམས་ཞི་མཛད་རྒྱལ། ། དེ་ལྟར་
དཀོན་མཆོག་ལ་མཆོད་པ་རྒྱ་ཆེར་བྱས་ནས། གཞོན་ནུ་དེ་དག་སེམས་མགུ་བཞིན་
དུ་ཕྱིར་བྱུང་སྟེ། བདག་ཉིད་ཆེན་པོ་ཐམས་ཅད་མཁྱེན་པའི་བཤེས་གཉེན་བསྟི་
གནས་ག་ལ་བ་དེར་སོང་ནས། བཤེས་གཉེན་ཆེན་པོ་དེའི་ཞབས་ལ་མགོ་བོས་ཕྱག་
འཚལ་ཞིང༌། བདག་གི་བདོག་པ་ཐམས་ཅད་ཀྱང་ཕུལ་ནས་འདི་སྐད་ཅེས་གསོལ་
ཏོ། འཁོར་ བའི་ དོང་ དུ་ རབ་ ལྷུང་ཞིང་། ། ཉོན་མོངས་ མེ་ཡིས་ བསྲེགས་ པ་
རྣམས། །ཐུགས་རྗེའི་ཕྱག་གིས་རྣམ་དྲངས་ནས། ། ཆོས་ཀྱི་བདུད་རྩིས་ཚིམ་
མཛད་གསོལ། ། མུན་པར་སྣང་བ་ལོང་བ་ལ། ། མིག་མཁན་བཀྲེན་ལ་ཡིད་
བཞིན་ནོར། ། ལམ་ལ་ལམ་མཁན་ཐར་པ་ཡི། ། གླིང་ཁྲིད་དེད་དཔོན་ཁྱོད་ཉིད་
ལགས། ། དེས་ཀྱང་བཀའ་བསྩལ་བ། སྐལ་བཟང་རིང་ན་གོ་ཆ་གྱོན་ཞིང་ལེགས་
བྱས་རབ་སྨིན་གཞོན་ནུ་ཁྱོད་ཅག་འོངས་པ་ལེགས། ། ཚུར་ཤོག་ཆོས་ཀྱི་རྒྱ་མཚོར་
ལེགས་ཞུགས་ ཅི་འདོད་རིན་ཆེན་དགེ་ལེགས་འབྱུང་བ་སྦྱིན་པར་བྱ། ། དབུལ་
པོའི་ཁྱིམ་དང་ལྟེང་ཀ་དག་ཏུ་ཕོངས་པའི་མགྲོན་དང་སྐོམ་པས་ཉེན་རྣམས་འབྲས་
མེད་དེ། ། ཆུ་གཏེར་ཆེ་དང་རིན་ཆེན་གླིང་ནི་དེ་དག་ཀུན་གྱི་རེ་བ་མཆོག་ ཏུ་
རྫོགས་བྱེད་ ཉིད། ། དེ་ནས་ བདག་ ཉིད་ཆེན་པོ་དེས་སྒྲ་དང༌། ཚད་མ་དང་།
ལུང་དང་། མན་ངག་ཐམས་ཅད་ལེགས་པར་བསྟན་ཅིང་། གཞོན་ནུ་དག་གིས་
ཀྱང་ལེགས་པར་ཁོང་དུ་ཆུད་པར་གྱུར་ཏོ། ། ཁྱད་པར་དུ་ཡང་གཞོན་ནུ་ལེགས་
པའི་བློ་གྲོས་ནི་ཤིན་ཏུ་ཡིད་གཞུངས་ཤིང༌། ཤེས་རབ་དང་སྤོབས་པ་མཆོག་ཏུ་
གྱུར་པས་སྡེ་སྣོད་གསུམ་དང༌། བསླབ་པའི་གནས་གསུམ་དང་། བདག་མེད་པ་



གཉིས་ལ་ སོགས་ པ་ ཐམས་ ཅད་ཀྱི་དོན་ཇི་ལྟ་ བ་ ཤེས་ ཤིང་ རྟོགས་ པར་གྱུར་ཏོ།
གཞོན་ནུ་དེ་དག་གིས་དགེ་བའི་བཤེས་གཉེན་ལ་བསྔགས་པ། སྤྲོས་པ་ཀུན་དང་
བྲལ་བ་ཉིད་ཅེས་སྤྲོས་པ་སྣ་ཚོགས་ཆོས་སྟོན་ཞིང་། ། བརྗོད་དུ་མེད་དོན་རྟོགས་
པར་བྱ་སླད་ཐ་སྙད་སྒོ་རྣམས་རབ་ཏུ་བརྗོད། ། རྣམ་པ་དུ་མས་ཡོངས་སུ་བཤད་
ཀྱང་འགལ་བ་འགའ་ཡང་ཡོད་མིན་པ། ། ཤེས་བྱ་ཇི་སྙེད་མ་འདྲེས་འབྱེད་ཀྱང་
རང་བཞིན་གཅིག་ཏུ་སྡུད་པ་མཚར། ། དེ་ལྟར་གཞོན་ནུ་ལེགས་པའི་བློ་གྲོས་མང་
དུ་ཐོས་པའི་ནོར་གྱིས་བློ་གྲོས་ཀྱི་བང་མཛོད་རབ་ཏུ་ཕྱུག་པ། བླང་བ་དང་དོར་
བའི་གནས་ལེགས་པར་འབྱེད་པའི་སྤོབས་པ་ ཅན་དེས་ཡང་དག་པར་བསྐུལ་ཏེ།
གཞོན་ནུ་དགེ་བ་ཅན་གྱིས་གྲོགས་དག་ལ་སྨྲས་པ། འཇིག་རྟེན་འདི་ནི་རྨི་ལམ་
སྨིག་རྒྱུ་དྲི་ཟའི་གནས་ལྟར་རྫུན་མ་ཉིད། ། འདོད་པའི་ལོངས་སྤྱོད་རྩྭ་རྩེའི་ཟིལ་པ་
དུག་གམ་ལན་ཚྭའི་ཆུ་དང་མཚུངས། ། དེ་ལ་ཆགས་རྣམས་དུད་འགྲོའམ་བེམ་པོ་
ཡང་ན་སྨྱོན་པ་ཉིད་ཡིན་ཏེ། ། དེ་བས་བདག་ཅག་འདོད་པ་ཡོངས་བཏང་ཞི་བ་
འཚོལ་ཕྱིར་ནགས་སུ་འགྲོ། །གཞོན་ནུ་འདོད་ལྷའི་བུས་སྨྲས་པ། ཇི་ལྟར་བདག་
ཅག་ཡོངས་བསྐྱེད་ ཕ་མ་དང༌། ། མཛའ་བཤེས་གཉེན་གྲོགས་བུ་དང་ཆུང་མ་
སོགས། ། རེ་ཐག་བཅད་ཅིང་བདེ་བའི་ཁྱིམ་རྣམས་དང་། ། འབྱོར་པ་ཡོངས་
བཏང་ནགས་ སུ་ ཅི་ ཞིག་ བྱ། ། འོན་ ཀྱང་ ཁྱིམ་ གྱི་ དཔལ་ རྣམས་ ལོངས་ སྤྱད་
ཅིང་། །གཉེན་བཤེས་བྲན་འབངས་རེ་བ་རྫོགས་བྱས་ནས། །ལང་ཚོ་ཡོལ་ཚེ་
དཀའ་ཐུབ་ནགས་བསྟེན་ལ། ། འདི་ཕྱི་གཉིས་ཀའི་འབྲས་བུ་བླང་བར་རིགས། །
གཞོན་ནུ་དགེ་བ་ཅན་གྱིས་སྨྲས་པ། ཇི་ལྟར་ཉིན་མོ་རྒྱུ་སྐར་མཁའ་ལ་མཐོང་། །
མཚན་མོ་གློག་འགྱུ་ཡུད་ཙམ་སྣང་བྱེད་ལྟར། ། སྔོན་གྱི་ལེགས་བྱས་བརྒྱས་ཐོབ་
དལ་འབྱོར་འདི། ། རྙེད་པར་དཀའ་ཞིང་འཇིག་པར་སླ་བ་ཉིད། ། བདུད་རྩིའི་
ཁང་པར་འོས་པའི་རིན་ཆེན་གྱི། ། སྣོད་ནི་མི་གཙང་བླུགས་ཏེ་དོར་བྱ་མིན། །
ཡོན་ཏན་མཐའ་ཡས་རྟེན་གྱུར་གཙང་མའི་ལུས། ། སྐྱོན་རྣམས་བརྟེན་ཅིང་ཆུད་
ཟོས་ག་ལ་རུང་། ། སུ་ཞིག་བསྟེན་པས་བདག་ཉིད་བརླག་འགྱུར་བའི། ། གཉེན་
19
54



འདུན་དེ་ནི་དགྲ་བོའི་མཆོག་ཡིན་ཏེ། ། སྣ་ཚོགས་ཐབས་ཀྱིས་སྡིག་ལ་རབ་སྦྱར་
ནས། ། དམྱལ་བར་ལྷུང་ཚེ་གཉེན་གྱིས་ཅི་ཞིག་ཕན། ། བསག་དང་བསྲུང་དང་
བརླག་པར་དོགས་པ་ཡི། ། སྡུག་བསྔལ་མི་བཟད་རང་གིས་སྤྱད་མོད་ཀྱི། ། སེར་
སྣས་ཡི་དྭགས་གནས་སུ་ཁྲིད་པའི་ཚེ། ། གནས་དང་ཡོ་བྱད་ཕུན་ཚོགས་གང་དུ་
སོང་། ། གསལ་བའི་བློ་མིག་ལྡན་ཡང་ལོག་པ་ཡི། ། ལམ་ཞུགས་གཡོ་སྒྱུ་ངན་སྤྱོད་
འབའ་ཞིག་གོམས། ། དེ་ཡིས་དུད་འགྲོའི་གནས་ལྷུང་སྡུག་བསྔལ་དང་། ། རྨོངས་
པས་བཅོམ་ཚེ་དེ་ལས་ཇི་ལྟར་ཐར། ། སྙིང་སྟོབས་ལང་ཚོ་ལྡན་ཚེ་དམན་པ་ཡི། །
བྱ་བས་ལུས་སེམས་ལྷག་མར་བྱས་ནས་ནི། །རྒས་ཚེ་བདག་ཉིད་འཚོ་བར་མི་ནུས་
ན། ། དཀའ་ཐུབ་བསམ་གཏན་དེ་ཡིས་ཇི་ལྟར་བཟོད། ། གང་ལ་ཆགས་རྣམས་
དབང་མེད་རབ་གཏོང་ཞིང༌། ། འཆི་བདག་སྲིན་པོའི་ཁར་ནི་མངོན་སོང་སྟེ། །
ནད་ཀྱི་མཆེ་བས་དྲག་བཏབ་ངན་འགྲོ་ཡི། ། ལྟོ་བར་འཇུག་ཚེ་ནགས་སུ་འགྲོ་འམ་
ཅི། །ཡུད་ཙམ་ལོངས་སྤྱོད་རྩྭ་ཡི་རྩེ་དགའ་ལ། ། རབ་ཆགས་གཏན་གྱི་བདེ་བ་
འདོར་བྱེད་པ། ། ཐ་ཤལ་དེ་ནི་ནོར་བུའི་ཕུང་པོ་དག ། ཐལ་བར་འཚོང་བྱེད་དེ་
བས་ཤིན་ཏུ་བླུན། ། ཐར་པའི་གེགས་བྱེད་མཛའ་གྲོགས་གཤིན་རྗེའི་མི། ། ནོར་
ནི་འཆིང་བྱེད་བདུད་ཀྱི་ཞགས་པ་ཉིད། ། གནས་ལ་ཆགས་རྣམས་འཆི་བདག་རྒྱ་
མཚོར་ཆུད། ། འདོད་ཡོན་ལེགས་བྱས་སྲེག་པའི་མེ་དཔུང་ཡིན། ། ངེས་པར་འཆི་
འགྱུར་དེ་དུས་ངེས་མེད་དེ། ། གང་དུ་སྐྱེས་ཀྱང་བདེ་བ་ཡོད་མེད་པས། ། དེ་ཕྱིར་
ཆགས་པ་ཐམས་ཅད་རབ་སྤོངས་ལ། ། ངེས་པར་འབྱུང་ལ་མངོན་པར་དགའ་
བར་གྱིས། ། དེ་ལྟར་རིགས་ཤིང་དོན་དང་མཐུན་པའི་ཚིག་ཐོས་པས་ལན་དུ་སྨྲ་
བར་མ་སྤོབས་ཀྱང་། ཡུན་རིང་པོ་ནས་འཇུངས་པ་ལ་གོམས་པས་འདོད་པའི་
དབང་དུ་ནི་གྱུར། སྲིད་པའི་བདེ་བ་ཆུང་ངུ་ལ་ཆགས་ཤིང༌། ཐར་པའི་བདེ་བ་རྒྱུ་
ཆེན་པོ་བློར་མ་ཆུད་པས་སྐྲག་ཅིང་དངངས་པར་གྱུར་ནས། དེའི་མཚན་མོ་ནམ་
ཕྱེད་དུ་ཉེ་བ་ན། སྐྱེ་འགྲོའི་རྒྱུ་བ་ཆད་ཅིང༌། བྱ་རྣམས་ཀྱང་མི་སྨྲ་བའི་བརྟུལ་
ཞུགས་བླངས་ཏེ་འདུག་པ་ལ། སྤྲིན་གྱི་བླ་བྲེ་སྟུག་པོས་ཡོངས་སུ་ཁེབས་པས་ཟླ་བ་



དང་སྐར་མའི་སྣང་བ་མེད་པའི་ཚེ། ཕུ་བོ་གསུམ་གཙུག་ལག་ཁང་དེ་ཉིད་ནས་
བྲོས་ཏེ་སོང་ངོ༌། ། རང་གི་གནས་སུ་མྱུར་དུ་སླེབས་པར་འདོད་ནས། དེ་ལྟར་
ཚམ་ཚོམ་མེད་པར་རྒྱུགས་ པ་ལས་ལམ་ནོར་ཏེ་རི་བོའི་ངོས་ལས་ཆུ་ ཅུང་ ཟད་
འབེབས་པ་གྲང་རེག་རྩུབ་མོས་བསྐྱེད་པའི་ཆབ་རོམ་མེ་ལོང་ངོས་ལྟར་འཇམ་པར་
གྱུར་པ་དག་ལ་འདྲེད་དེ། རིའི་ཟོམ་གཏིང་རབ་ཏུ་ཟབ་པ་ལམ་དང་ཐེམ་སྐས་
མེད་ཅིང་འཇིགས་སུ་རུང་བ་གཤིན་རྗེའི་ཁ་ལྟ་བུའི་ནང་དུ་ལྟུང་བར་གྱུར་ཏོ།
དེར་ཤིང་ལོ་རྙིང་པ་ཟགས་པ་རྣམས་ཀྱིས་འབོལ་བླངས་ཏེ་ཡན་ལག་བསྣད་པར་མ་
གྱུར་མོད་ཀྱི། ད་ནི་བདག་ཅག་འཆི་བ་ཁོ་ན་འོ་སྙམ་ནས་མྱ་ངན་གྱིས་ནོན་པའི་སྨྲེ་
ངག་དཔག་ཏུ་མེད་པ་འབྱིན་ཞིང་འདུག་གོ ། དེ་ནས་ནངས་པར་ནམ་ལངས་
པའི་ཚེ། ནུ་བོ་རྣམས་ཀྱིས་གང་དུ་བཙལ་ཀྱང་ཕུ་བོ་མ་རྙེད་པར། ངེས་པར་རང་
གི་ཡུལ་ཉིད་དུ་བྲོས་སོ་སྙམ་ནས། ལམ་དུ་ཞུགས་ཏེ་རིངས་པ་རིངས་པར་ཕྱིན་པ་
དང༌། ལམ་དང་ཉེ་བ་ན་ཆོ་ངེའི་སྒྲ་གྲགས་པ་ཐོས་ནས་དེར་དོང་བ་ལས། ཕུ་བོ་
རྣམས་དེ་ལྟར་གྱུར་པ་མཐོང་ངོ༌། ། དེའི་ཚེ་གཞོན་ནུ་དགེ་བ་ཅན་ཡིད་སྐྱོ་བར་
གྱུར་ནས་ གྲོགས་དག་ལ་སྨྲས་པ། གྲོགས་པོ་དག་ཇི་ལྟར་ཆུ་བོའི་རྒྱུན་ལྟར་མི་
བརྟན་ཞིང་ཐུར་ཁོ་ནར་རྒྱུགས་པའི་སྤུན་ཟླ་འདི་དག་ཇི་ཙམ་འབད་ཀྱང་ལེགས་
པའི་ལམ་ལ་མི་འཇུག་ཅིང་། བདག་ ཅག་ གི་ངེས་པར་འབྱུང་བ་ལ་གེགས་བྱེད་
པར་ཟད་ཅིང་། ད་ནི་འདི་དག་གི་ཆེད་དུ་ངལ་བས་ཅི་ཞིག་བྱ་དོར་ཞིག བདག་
ཅག་དཀའ་ཐུབ་ཀྱི་ནགས་སུ་འགྲོ་བར་བྱའོ། ། གཞོན་ནུ་མཉེས་གཤིན་བཟང་
པོས་སྨྲས་པ། སྡིག་པ་ཞི་བར་གྱུར་ཅིག གྲོགས་པོ། དེ་ལྟ་བུའི་ཚིག་བརྗོད་པར་
མི་བྱའོ། ཇི་ལྟར་བདག་ཅག་སེམས་ཅན་ཐམས་ཅད་སྒྲོལ་བ་ལ་ཞུགས་པ་མ་ཡིན་
ནམ། འདི་ལྟར་སྤུན་ཟླར་གྱུར་པ་ལའང་བརྩེ་བར་མི་བྱེད་པའི་དཀའ་ཐུབ་ཀྱི་
ནགས་ཀྱིས་ཅི་ཞིག་བྱ། མྱུར་དུ་ཞུགས་ནས་ཕུ་བོ་རྣམས་དབུགས་དབྱུང་བར་བྱའོ་
ཞེས་ཏེ། དེར་ཕྱིན་ནས་གྲོགས་པོ་དག་ཅི་ཉེས་ཞེས་སྨྲས་པ་ན། རང་རང་གི་སྲོག་
ལས་ལྷག་པའི་སྤུན་བླ་མ་ལྟར་གདམས་ངག་སྟོན་པར་བྱེད་པ་ཁྱེད་ཅག་གི་ཚིག་ལས་
སུམ''
56



འགལ་བའི་ཕྱིར་མི་བཟད་པའི་གནོད་པ་འདིར་བདག་ཅག་ལྷུང་ངོ༌། ཡོངས་སུ་
སྐྱོབས་ཤིག སླན་ཆད་བླ་མའི་བཀའ་བཞིན་དུ་བགྱིད་དོ། ཞེས་ཕྱག་འཚལ་
ལོ། ། དེ་ནས་གཞོན་ནུ་གསུམ་གྱིས་ཕུ་བོ་རྣམས་དབུགས་ཕྱུང་ནས་གཅོང་རོང་
དེར་རབ་ཏུ་ཞུགས་ཏེ་ངོགས་ཀྱི་ས་རྣམས་རབ་ཏུ་བརྐོས་ཤིང་ལམ་བྱས་ནས་ཚུར་
ཤོག་ཅིག་ཅེས་སྨྲས་པ་ན། དེ་རྣམས་སྐྲག་ཅིང་སྤ་ཀོང་བས་ཡན་ལག་འཁུམས་ཏེ་
འཛེག་པར་མ་ནུས་པ་དང༌། ལུས་སྟོབས་ རབ་ཏུ་ཆེན་པོ་བསོད་ནམས་ཀྱི་མཐུ་
དང་མཚུངས་པ་དེ་དག་གིས་རེ་རེ་བཞིན་འཁུར་ནས་སྟེང་དུ་ཕྱིན་པར་བྱས་ཏེ་སྤུན་
རྣམས་འགྲོགས་ནས་མངོན་པར་དགའ་བའི་གཙུག་ལག་ཁང་དེ་ཉིད་དུ་སོང་ངོ༌།
བསོད་ནམས་འཁྲི་ཤིང་ལས་གྲུབ་དྲན་པའི་འཁྱུད་མོས་བསྡོམས་ཤིང་སྤོབས་པའི་བ་
དན་ལེགས་པར་འཕྱར། ། སྐྱོ་བའི་གདོས་ཀྱིས་རབ་བསྐུལ་ངེས་འབྱུང་ལྕགས་སྐུད་
བརྟན་ཅིང་ དགེ་ བའི་ བཤེས་གཉེན་དེད་དཔོན་བཟང་། ། མང་དུ་ ཐོས་ པའི་
ཤུགས་ཀྱིས་བསྟན་པའི་རྒྱ་མཚོར་ཉེར་ཞུགས་ཉོན་མོངས་ཆུ་སྲིན་འཇིགས་དང་་་་
བྲལ། ། ཐར་པའི་གླིང་དུ་མྱུར་འགྲོ་བྱང་ཆུབ་ནོར་བུ་ལེགས་ཐོབ་བརྩོན་འགྲུས་གྲུ་
ཆེན་རྨད་དུ་བྱུང༌། ། དེ་ལྟར་སྐྱེ་འགྲོ་རྣམས་འཆི་བའི་ཆོས་ཅན་ནོ་ཞེས་པ་དང༌།
རྨོངས་པ་དང་ལེ་ལོའི་ཉེས་པ་བསྟན་པ་དང༌། ཡིད་སྐྱོ་བ་ནི་དགེ་བ་ཐམས་ཅད་ལ་
བསྐུལ་མ་འདེབས་པའོ་ཞེས་བརྗོད་ཅིང་། དཀོན་མཆོག་མཆོད་པ་དང་། མང་དུ་
ཐོས་པའི་ཡོན་ཏན་རབ་ཏུ་བསྔགས་ཏེ་སྐྱེས་བུ་ཆེན་པོའི་བརྩོན་འགྲུས་ནི་འདི་ལྟར་
ཕུལ་དུ་བྱུང་བའོ་ཞེས་བརྗོད་པར་བྱའོ། ། རབ་ཏུ་བྱེད་པ་ལྔ་པའོ། ། ། །



རབ་བྱེད་དྲུག་པ་ཡོན་ཏན་ཐམས་
ཅད་བསྐྱེད་པའི་བསམ་གཏན་
ལ་བསྔགས་པ།
དེ་ནས་རེ་ཞིག་གི་ཚེ། གཞོན་ནུ་དེ་དག་འཁོར་བའི་ཉེས་པ་རྣམས་ཀྱིས་ནི་
སུན་བྱུང་ཞིང་། འདོད་པའི་ལོངས་སྤྱོད་ལ་ནི་རྒྱབ་ཀྱིས་ཕྱོགས། ཡིད་སྐྱོ་བས་
ངེས་པར་འབྱུང་བ་ལ་ནི་དགའ་བར་གྱུར་ཏེ། དཀའ་ཐུབ་ཀྱི་ནགས་ཚལ་ཡོངས་སུ་
བསྟེན་པའི་ཕྱིར་གཙུག་ལག་ཁང་དེ་ཉིད་ནས་བྱང་ཕྱོགས་སུ་ཡུལ་རྒྱུ་བས་རྒྱུ་ཞིང་
རིང་མོ་ཞིག་ཏུ་ཕྱིན་པ་དང་། སྤོས་ངད་ལྡན་པའི་རི་བོ་ཞེས་བྱ་བ། ལྷའི་དྲང་སྲོང་
དང་འབྱུང་པོ་དུ་མས་བསྟེན་པ་དག་དང་ཉེ་བར་ཕྱིན་ཏོ། དེ་ན་ལྷུན་པོ་གཉིས་པ་
བཞིན། ། སྤོས་ངད་ལྡན་པའི་རི་བོ་ནི། ། ལྟ་ན་རབ་བརྗིད་ནོར་འཛིན་གྱི། །
འཁོར་ལོའི་ལྟེ་བ་ལྟ་བུ་མཐོང་། །རྒྱ་ཁྱོན་དཔག་ཡས་ས་འཛིན་གྱིས། ། མི་ཡི་
འཇིག་རྟེན་ཡོངས་བཀང་སྟེ། ། ནམ་ མཁར་མངོན་འཕགས་ རི་རབ་རྩེར། །
སྐབས་གསུམ་རོལ་རྩེད་ལྟ་འདོད་བཞིན། ། སྐར་ཚོགས་ནོར་བུའི་བ་གམ་ནི། །
ལྕི་བའི་འཁུར་འཛིན་བཻ་ཌཱུརྱའི། ། ཡང་ཐོག་ལྷུང་བར་དོགས་པ་ཡིས། ། རྡོ་རྗེའི་
ཀ་བས་བཏེགས་པ་བཞིན། ། ཟིལ་པའི་མུ་ཏིག་དོ་ཤལ་གྱིས། ། རབ་དཀྲིས་ཆུ་
འཛིན་ན་ཆུང་དག ། ནགས་ཚལ་བདག་པོའི་མཛེས་པ་ལ། ༑ ཆགས་པས་འཁྱུད་
པར་བྱེད་པ་བཞིན། ། དྲང་སྲོང་ཐུབ་པའི་དཀའ་ཐུབ་ཚལ། །གཉིས་འཐུང་
རྣམས་ཀྱི་རིགས་ཀྱི་གནས། ། རི་དྭགས་དབང་པོའི་ཕོ་བྲང་ཆེ། ། གྲུབ་པའི་བསྟི་
གནས་ཉེ་བར་གྱུར། ། དབང་པོའི་གཞུ་ཡི་ཅོད་པན་རབ་བཅིངས་ན་བུན་རས་
བལ་སྟོད་གཡོགས་མཛེས། ། མེ་ཏོག་སྣ་ཚོགས་རྣམ་པར་བཀྲ་བའི་ལྗོན་ཤིང་དོ་
ཤལ་རྣམས་ཀྱིས་བརྒྱན། ། འབབ་ཆུ་རབ་དྭངས་སྐ་རགས་ཡིད་འོང་ནེའུ་གསིང་



59
བར་མཛོད་ཅིག
བརྒྱན་པ་བཞིན་དུ་འདུག
ལྡན་པའི། ། ལྗོན་ཤིང་ན་ཆུང་དག་ནི་ཀུན་ནས་གཡོ་བའི་གར་བསྒྱུར་ཡལ་གའི་
ནི། ། སིང་སིང་འུར་འུར་ཞེས་འདི་བསྒྲགས་ཚེ་ལོ་འདབ་སྡུ་གུའི་སྐུ་ཚོགས་འཁྱིལ་
སྦྲུལ་གྱི་སྙིང་པོའི་ཙན་དན་དྲིས་བསྒོས་རླུང་གཞོན་རྣམས་ཀྱི་རྒྱུད་མངས་སྒྲ་སྙན་
ཚལ་ཞེས་བྱ་བ་ཡོད་ཅེས་གྲགས་ན་ཅི། དེ་འདིར་འཕོས་པ་མ་ཡིན་ནམ་ལྟོས་ཤིག
ཇི་ལྟར་ལྷ་རྣམས་ཀྱི་ཡུལ་ན་ལྷ་ཡི་ཡོངས་སུ་སྤྱོད་པ་འདྲེས་པའི་
དོང་ངོ་། ། དེའི་ཚེ་གཞོན་ནུ་འདོད་ལྷའི་བུས་སྨྲས་པ། ཀྱེ་གྲོགས་པོ་དག་དང་
ཐུབ་པ་དག་བརྟེན་ཞིང་གནས་པའི་ནགས་ཚལ་ཆེན་པོ་དེ་དང་དེ་དག་ཏུ་རིམ་གྱིས་
པ་སྣ་ཚོགས་བརྩེགས་པའི་བྱ་སྐྱིབས་དག་ཏུ་ཡོན་ཏན་དོན་དུ་གཉེར་བའི་དཀའ་
སྒྲ་འབྱིན་པའི་ཆུ་ཀླུང་དག་ནི་རབ་ཏུ་དྭངས་བར་གྱུར་ལ། བྲག་རིའི་དུམ་བུ་རྣམ་
བསྒྱུར་བས་ནི་མཛེས། རིའི་ངོགས་ལས་མྱུར་དུ་རྒྱུག་ཅིང་། ལྷུང་ལྷུང་སྙན་པའི་
དང་། འཁྲི་ཤིང་གི་ཚོགས་རྣམས་བསེར་བུས་བསྐྱོད་དེ་ཤུ་གླུ་ལེན་ཞིང་བྲོ་གར་
ཡལ་ག་དང༌། ལོ་འདབ་རྒྱས་པ་མང་པོས་ནི་ས་ཕྱོགས་གང་བར་གྱུར། སྨྱུག་མ་
དང༌། མྱ་ངན་མེད་པ་དང་། པཱ་ལ་དང་། ནྱ་གྲོ་དྷ་ལ་སོགས་པ་ཁ་དོག་སྡུག་ཅིང་
སྒྲོགས་པ་རྣམས་ནི་ལང་ལོང་དུ་རྒྱུ། ཙན་དན་སྦྲུལ་གྱི་སྙིང་པོ་དང་། ཏ་མ་ལ་
དེ་ལ་འདུས་པའི་བུང་བ་སྒྲ་སྙན་པའི་གླུ་དབྱངས་
བས་ནི་ཁེབས། ཁ་དོག་སྣ་ཚོགས་པའི་མེ་ཏོག་གསར་དུ་འཁྲུངས་པ་རྣམས་ཀྱིས་ནི་
ནས་གཞོན་ནུ་དེ་དག་རིམ་གྱིས་རིའི་ངོགས་རབ་ཏུ་མི་བཟད་པ་རྩྭ་ལྗང་ཡིད་དུ་འོང་
པས། ། དྲི་ཟ་བཞིན་དུ་རི་བོའི་ངོས། ། རབ་ཏུ་མི་བཟད་བརྒལ་བར་གྱུར། ། དེ་
བསྒྲུབས། ། ངལ་བའི་དབུགས་ཀྱི་གླིང་བུ་དང༌། ། གཡོ་བའི་གར་གྱི་ རྒྱུ་བྱེད་
འབྲི་བྱེད་དེའི། ། འགྲམ་པར་ཉི་ཟེར་སོར་མོ་ཡིས། ། རྡུལ་ཐིགས་ཆུ་ཤེལ་ཕྲེང་བ་
ལ་རབ་འཛེགས། ། རྐང་པའི་འཁོར་ལོ་རྣམ་བཀོད་པས། ། དགེ་མཚན་རི་མོ་
ཡ་མཚན་ལ་བཀོད་དེ། ། དགའ་བ་རྒྱ་ཆེན་དང་འགྲོགས་ནས། ། སྤྲོ་བའི་ཤིང་རྟ་
འཇིག་རྟེན་བྱེད་པོས་སྤྲུལ་པ་མཐོང་། ། དེ་ཚེ་འཛུམ་པ་དང་བྲལ་བའི། ། མིག་ནི་
གསར་པའི་སྨད་དཀྲིས་ཅན། ། ཡ་མཚན་ཐམས་ཅད་བསྡུས་པའི་གཟུགས་བརྙན་
8
2
8
:
1
:
48:34:
4
4
:
1:|
:
:
2
9
:
tps :
1:|
+8
#kattikly
13
པི
སྤྱི #
*#ཏ**3%isg#*ighgr#*#g/# སg#*#*#
དྷིམྨt:
:༤- , es;ffe
APA8=Rt
#'༩
; ''' ཏ ཝིསbe+4x484
* ཨབྦཙྩཾ, : 5, ++ཏཱ, rel+rv•v>ཀཾ ཀྐ ཀྐi s,
'༔ ཏ་ཏ༔
ཧཐ
******#l + རྩྭ ༔ ཐ༧
བཟཆ་ ཐ #dཆt.༧14 ༤ ཟ
-- --



ལག་རྩེ་ཡིས། ། ཐལ་སྦྱར་ཤིས་པ་བརྗོད་ཅིང་འབྲས་བུ་སྨིན་པ་འཐོར་བས་བདག་
ཅག་མགྲོན་དུ་གཉེར། ། ལྦུ་བ་དཀྲིས་པའི་ཤེལ་ཕྲེང་ དོ་ ཤལ་མཛེས་པས་ལུས་
བརྒྱན་ འབབ་ ལྡན་སྔོ་བསངས་མའི། ། རྦ་རླབས་གོས་ལྷུང་ ཟོལ་གྱི་ཆུ་ ཐིགས་
ཟེགས་མ་གཏོར་བས་གང་གི་འགྲམ་པ་ཡི། ། སྨུག་རྩིའི་ངོས་ལ་ཟིལ་པའི་མུ་ཏིག་དྲ་
བ་བཀོད་པས་མཛེས་གྱུར་མེ་ཏོག་རྣམས། ། མཆུ་ཡི་ཡལ་འདབ་རྣམ་པར་ཕྱེ་སྟེ་གེ་
སར་སོ་ཕྲེང་སྟོན་བཞིན་བཞད་གད་བྱེད། ། སྤུ་སྡུག་ཡིད་འོང་བྱ་རྣམས་འཇོ་སྒེག་
རོལ་རྩེད་རྒྱུ་བས་ཕན་ཚུན་འབེལ་གཏམ་གྱི། ། སྒྲ་སྙན་སྣ་ཚོགས་འབྱིན་པས་ཡིད་
འཕྲོག་རྣ་བའི་ཅོད་པན་གཡོ་མེད་བཏུད་གྱུར་པ། ། སྐེད་ངོས་ཕྲ་ཞིང་བྱིན་པ་
མཆོག་ཏུ་མཛེས་ལྡན་རི་དྭགས་འདི་དག་དོགས་མེད་པར། ། རྡོ་བྲག་རྣམ་པར་
བཀྲ་བའི་བྱ་སྐྱིབས་དག་ཏུ་དྲང་སྲོང་ཚུལ་བཞིན་དུལ་བར་གནས། ། མང་དུ་སྨོས་
ཀྱང་ཅི་ཞིག་འཚལ་ཏེ་ནགས་ཚལ་འདི་ནི་བདག་ཅག་གི་ཡིད་ལ་དགའ་བ་མཆོག་ཏུ་
འཕེལ་བར་བྱེད་པ་ཞིག་གོ གཞོན་ནུ་ལེགས་པའི་བློ་གྲོས་ཀྱིས་སྨྲས་པ། འདི་ནི་
མཁས་པའི་དཀའ་ཐུབ་ཀྱི། ། ཚལ་ ཞེས་ ཡོན་ཏན་ མཐའ་ ཡས་ པས། ། རབ་
བསྔགས་སྐྱེ་བོ་འདུ་འཛི་ཡི། ། གདུང་བས་ཉེན་ལ་ གྲིབ་བསིལ་ ཉིད། ། འགྲོ་
འདིར་དཔའ་བོ་དག་ལ་བརྟེན་ན་དགྲ་བོས་ཟིལ་གནོན་མི་འགྱུར་ཡངས་པ་ཡི། །
གདུགས་ཀྱིས་བཀབ་ན་ཆུ་འཛིན་ཐིགས་པས་གནོད་མིན་སྲ་བའི་གོ་བགོས་མཚོན་
གྱིས་མིན། ། ལུས་སེམས་དགེ་བས་ནགས་ཚལ་དབེན་པར་གནས་ན་འདོད་སྲེད་
གཡོ་སྒྱུ་ངན་སྤྱོད་དང༌། ། མི་དགེ་སྣ་ཚོགས་ཀུན་གྱིས་མི་གོས་ངང་གིས་ཞི་བ་རབ་
ཏུ་འཐོབ་པར་འགྱུར། ། དེ་ལྟར་ངེས་པར་བྱས་ནས་དེ་དག་ལྷུན་པོའི་ངོགས་བོ་
ཌུརྱ་དྭངས་བ་དང་། ལྷའི་གཞོན་ནུ་དག་རྒྱུ་བའམ་སྟོན་ཀའི་ནམ་མཁའ་དྲི་མ་
མེད་པ་ལ། སྐར་མའི་ཚོགས་རྒྱུ་བ་ལྟར་མཛེས་པས་ རྒྱུ་ཞིང་སོང་སོང་བ་ལས།
ཚལ་དེ་དག་ན་གནས་པའི་དཀའ་ཐུབ་པ་གཞོན་ནུ་རིགས་པ་སློབ་ཅིང་ཁ་ཏོན་ལ་
བརྩོན་པ་འགའ་ཞིག་གིས་མཐོང་ནས། གཞོན་ནུ་དག་གི་གཟུགས་མཛེས་ཤིང་
དཔལ་འབར་བ་ལ་ཐེ་ཚོམ་དང་ལྡན་པས་ཐལ་མོ་སྦྱར་ཏེ་སྨྲས་པ། ཀྱི། ལྷ་དག་
60



བྱོན་པ་ལེགས་སོ། བདག་ཅག་གི་རེ་བ་རྫོགས་པར་གྱུར་ཅིག ཅི་ཞིག་ཁྱེད་ཅག་
མཐོ་རིས་གྲོང་གི་བདག་པོ་མིག་སྟོང་ཅན་ནམ་ཟླ་བའི་གཙུག་ཕུད་དམ། ། འོན་ཏེ་
རྣམ་ཐོས་བུ་འམ་ཡང་ན་རྒྱུ་མཚོའི་དབང་པོ་ནོར་རྒྱས་ལོངས་སྤྱོད་ལྡན་པ་འམ། །
འོན་ཏེ་ འཇིག་ རྟེན་ བྱེད་ པོ་ གདོང་ བཞི་ པ་ དེ་ བདག་ ཅག་ རྗེས་ སུ་ བཟུང་ སླད་
གཤེགས་པ་ལགས། ། དེ་ལྟ་ན་ནི་བདག་ཅག་དལ་བའི་འབྲས་བུ་ལེགས་བྱས་ས་
བོན་བརྒྱ་ལས་འཁྲུངས་པར་ངེས། ། གཞོན་ནུ་ལེགས་པའི་བློ་གྲོས་ཀྱིས་སྨྲས་པ།
གྲོགས་པོ་དག་དགེ་བ་འཕེལ་བར་གྱུར་ཅིག བདག་ཅག་ལྷ་མིན་ཀླུ་འམ་ཚངས་པ་
དྲེགས་ལྡན་གནོད་སྦྱིན་མིན། ། འདོད་པའི་ཞགས་པ་བཅད་ནས་འདུ་འཛིའི་ར་
བ་ལས་བརྒལ་ཏེ། ། མགོ་ལ་སེམས་ཅན་ཁུར་ཁྱེར་འཁོར་བའི་རྒྱ་མཚོའི་ཕ་རོལ་
ཏུ། ། བདག་གཞན་བསྒྲལ་འདོད་དཀའ་ཐུབ་དོན་གཉེར་རྒྱལ་སྲས་གཞོན་ནུ་
འོ། །འདི་ན་འཇིགས་པས་ཉེན་ལ་དབུགས་འབྱིན་སུ་ཞིག་ཕོངས་པ་ལ། ། དམ་
ཆོས་བདུད་རྩིའི་གཏེར་ནི་སིམ་པར་སྦྱིན་ལ་སྐྱོ་མེད་སུ། ། ལོང་བའི་འགྲོ་ལ་ཡེ་ཤེས་
སྦྱངས་པའི་མིག་ཐུར་རྣོན་པོ་ཡིས། །རབ་རིབ་བསལ་ནས་མ་ནོར་ཐར་པའི་ལམ་
སྟོན་སུ་ཞིག་མཆིས། ། དེ་དག་གིས་སྨྲས་པ། ཀྱི་གཞོན་ནུ་དག དེ་ལྟ་ན་ནི་ཤིན་
ཏུའང་ལེགས་ཀྱི། དཀའ་ཐུབ་ཀྱི་ཚལ་འདི་ནི་རྩ་བ་དང་འབྲས་བུ་མང་ཞིང་།
གནོད་པ་མེད་ལ་མཁས་པ་རྣམས་ཀྱིས་བསྟེན་པར་བྱ་བ་ཡིན་ཞིང་། འདི་ན་བྱང་
ཆུབ་སེམས་དཔའ་སེམས་དཔའ་ཆེན་པོ་དྲི་མ་མེད་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས་བློ་གྲོས་སྔོན་གྱི་རྒྱལ་
བ་ལ་ལྷག་པར་མཆོད་ཅིང༌། དགེ་བའི་རྩ་བ་བསྐྲུན་པ། ཡུན་རིང་པོ་ནས་སེམས་
ཅན་ཐམས་ཅད་ལ་ཕན་པར་བཞུགས་པ། བྱམས་པ་དང་སྙིང་རྗེའི་ཆུས་ རྒྱུད་
ལེགས་པར་བརླན་ཞིང་དགེ་བའི་ས་བོན་མང་པོ་བཏབ་པ། གཟུངས་དང༌། ཏིང་
ངེ་འཛིན་དང་། མངོན་པར་ཤེས་པ་དང་། བྱང་ཆུབ་ཀྱི་ཡན་ལག་གི་མྱུ་གུ་དང༌།
མེ་ཏོག་དང་། སྡོང་པོ་དང་། ལོ་འདབ་དཔག་ཏུ་མེད་པ་འཁྲུངས་པ། རྣམ་པར་
གྲོལ་བའི་འབྲས་བུ་སྨིན་པ། འཇིག་རྟེན་ལས་ཡང་དག་པར་འདས་པ། ལྷ་དང་
མིར་བཅས་པའི་འཇིག་རྟེན་ལ་མགོན་དུ་གྱུར་པ་ཞིག་བཞུགས་ཀྱི། ཁྱེད་ཅག་དེ་ལ་
A
1



དང་པོར་སྐྱབས་སུ་བསྔོས་ཤིག་དང༌། ཡོན་ཏན་ཐམས་ཅད་ཀྱི་ཕ་རོལ་དུ་ཕྱིན་པ་
འཐོབ་པར་འགྱུར་རོ། ཚིགས་སུ་བཅད་པས་ཀྱང་སྨྲས་པ། དྲི་མེད་ཡེ་ཤེས་བློ་
གྲོས་ནི། ། དཔག་ཡས་ཡོན་ཏན་རིན་ཆེན་གཏེར། ། སྐལ་ལྡན་ཀླུ་དབང་ཚིམ་
བྱེད་པའི། ། ཆོས་ཀྱི་རྒྱ་མཚོ་ཆེན་པོ་ཡོད། ། དེ་ཡི་མཁྱེན་པ་མཁའ་ལྟར་ཡངས་
ཤིང་ཐུགས་ནི་ཆུ་གཏེར་ཆེ་ལྟར་གཏིང་དཔག་དཀའ། ། བརྟན་པ་རི་དབང་ལྟ་
བུར་མི་གཡོ་ཡེ་ཤེས་ཉི་མ་བརྒྱ་བས་ལྷག་པར་གསལ། ། འགྲོ་ལ་དཔག་བསམ་ཤིང་
ལྟར་བདེ་བྱེད་བློ་ནི་སེང་གེ་ལྟ་བུར་འཇིགས་པ་མེད། ། དེད་དཔོན་ལྟ་བུར་དྲང་
པོའི་ལམ་སྟོན་དབང་ཆེན་རྡུལ་བཞིན་ཡོན་ཏན་བགྲང་མི་ལང་། དེ་སྐད་ཡ་
མཚན་སྐྱེས་འདྲ་བའི། ། འོས་ཚིག་བདུད་རྩི་དེ་བཏུངས་ནས། ། དགའ་བ་མང་
པོས་གང་བའི་ལུས། ། འཕུར་བར་འདོད་བཞིན་དེ་ནས་སོང་། ། སྦྱིན་སྲེག་དུ་
བའི་ན་བུན་གྱི།. ། སྟོད་གཡོགས་མཛེས་ལྡན་འཁྲི་ཤིང་ཚལ། ། སྔོ་བསངས་འདབ་
མའི་རླུང་གཡབ་ཀྱིས། ། མྱུར་བར་དོངས་ཞེས་གཡབ་མོ་བྱས། ། དྲང་སྲོང་རྐང་
པའི་སྨུག་རྩི་ཡི། ། བཀྲ་ཤིས་རི་མོས་ལམ་མཚོན་ཏེ། ། གྲུབ་པས་གང་བའི་བསྟི་
གནས་དག ། རིམ་གྱིས་དགའ་དང་ལྡན་པ་མཐོང་། ། དེ་ལྟར་གྲུབ་པའི་བསྟི་
གནས་དེ་དང་དེ་དག་ཏུ་ལྟ་ཞིང་རིམ་གྱིས་སྤོས་ངད་ལྡན་པའི་རི་བོའི་རྩེ་བྲག་རི་
སྔོན་པོ་བཻཌཱུརྱའི་དུམ་བུ་བརྩེགས་པ་དང་། ཁ་ཅིག་དབང་པོའི་གཞུ་བཀོད་པ་ལྟར་
སྣང་བའི་བྱ་སྐྱིབས་ཤིང་ལྗོན་པ་དང༌། མེ་ཏོག་སྣ་ཚོགས་པས་ཁེབས་ཤིང་ལྷའི་
ཙན་དན་གྱི་དྲི་བསུང་རྒྱུན་དུ་འབྱུང་བ་དང་། བདུད་རྩིའི་འབྱུང་གནས་ཞེས་བྱ་
བའི་བསྟི་གནས་དམ་པ་ན། བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་དཔའ་སེམས་དཔའ་ཆེན་པོ་དྲི་མ་
མེད་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས་བློ་གྲོས་འཁོར་དང་བཅས་པ་འོད་ཟེར་སྟོང་ཕྲག་མང་པོའི་དབུས་
ན་ཉི་མའི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་དྲི་མ་མེད་པ་ལྟར་འདུག་པར་ཕྱིན་ཏོ། ། དེའི་ཚེ་གཞོན་ནུ་
དག་གི་དུ་བ་འཁྱིལ་བ་ལྟ་བུའི་ཐོར་ཚུགས་གསེར་གྱིས་བརྒྱན་པས་བདག་ཉིད་ཆེན་
པོ་དེའི་རྐང་པ་ལ་ཕྱག་འཚལ་ཞིང་། རང་གི་བདོག་པ་ཐམས་ཅད་ཡོངས་སུ་ཕུལ་
ནས་ཐལ་མོ་སྦྱར་ཏེ་གསོལ་བ། སྣ་ཚོགས་ས་འཛིན་དབུས་ན་ལྷུན་པོ་སྐར་ཚོགས་
62



ནང་ན་བསིལ་ཟེར་དྲ་བ་ཅན། ། འདབ་ཆགས་མང་པོ་རྒྱུ་ལས་མཁའ་ལྡིང་ཡལ་ག་
ལོ་འདབ་རྒྱས་པའི་རྐང་འཐུང་ལས། ། དཔག་བསམ་ལྗོན་པ་མཐའ་ཡས་རིན་
ཆེན་ཚོགས་ལས་ནོར་བུ་དབང་གི་རྒྱལ་པོ་སྟེ། ། མཁས་མང་དབུས་ན་ཡོན་ཏན་
བགྲང་ཡས་ཀུན་ལས་ཁྱད་པར་འཕགས་མཆོག་ཁྱོད་ཉིད་ལགས། ། ལས་ཀྱི་ཞགས་
པས་དམ་བཅིངས་ཉོན་མོངས་ལྕགས་སྒྲོག་གིས་བསྡམས་སྐྱེ་བ་ཡི། ། དོང་དུ་ལྷུང་
ཞིང་རྒ་དང་ན་བའི་མེས་བསྲེགས་འཆི་བདག་རལ་གྲི་ཡིས། ། མྱུར་དུ་སྲོག་གཅོད་
འགྱུར་བ་འཁོར་བའི་བཙོན་ར་འདི་ལས་བདག་ཅག་རྣམས། ། རབ་ཏུ་སྒྲོལ་ཅིག་
བླ་ན་མེད་པའི་གོ་འཕང་མཆོག་དེར་བདག་ ཕྱིན་མཛོད། ། དེ་ནས་བྱང་ཆུབ་
སེམས་དཔའ་སེམས་དཔའ་ཆེན་པོ་དེས། ཕྱག་གསེར་གྱི་པད་མོ་ལྟར་མཛེས་པ་སྤྱི་
བོར་བཞག་ནས་དྭངས་བར་བྱས་ཏེ་བཀའ་བསྩལ་བ། ལེགས་བྱས་བསོད་ནམས་
འཁྲི་ཤིང་གི། ། འབྲས་བུ་སྐལ་བཟང་རབ་སྨིན་པའི། ། ཡང་ཡང་གོམས་པའི་
མཐུ་ལས་བཞིན། ། གཞོན་ནུ་ཁྱེད་ཅག་འོངས་པ་ལེགས། ། སྔོན་གྱི་སྐྱེ་བའི་
འཁོར་ལོ་ཡི། ། བཟོ་ཆུན་ཕྲེང་བ་མང་པོར་ཡང་། ། བཏུང་བྱར་འོས་པ་བདུད་
རྩིའི་རྒྱུན། ། དེ་ནི་ང་ཡིས་རབ་ཏུ་བླུད། ། དེ་ཡང་འགྲོ་བའི་ཉོན་མོངས་ནད། །
ཀུན་སེལ་དམ་ཆོས་བདུད་རྩིའི་གཏེར། ། བསིལ་བ་སྦྱིན་གྱི་བློ་གྲོས་ཀྱི། ། རིན་
ཆེན་ སྣོད་ཡངས་ལྡན་ པས་ལོངས། ། སྔོན་གྱི་རྒྱལ་བོ་རྣམས་ཀྱི་ ཞབས་མཐིལ་
དམར་བ་ཡི། ། བཀྲ་ཤིས་འཁོར་ལོའི་རི་མོས་རིམ་གྱིས་གཤེགས་གྱུར་པ། ། སུམ་
ཅུ་རྩ་བདུན་རིམ་ལྡན་རིན་ཆེན་ཐེམ་སྐས་འདིར། ། འཛེགས་ཤིག་འཇིགས་རུང་
འཁོར་བའི་ དོང་ ལས་ ཐར་ བར་ འགྱུར། ། འགྲོ་ འདིར་ བདུད་ ཀྱིས་ ཡང་ ཡང་
བཅིངས་པའི་ཞགས་པ་ནི། ། འདོད་ལ་སྲེད་པས་དཀའ་ཐུབ་རལ་གྲིས་རབ་ཏུ་
གཅོད། ། སྡུག་བསྔལ་མྱུ་གུ་སྣ་ཚོགས་བསྐྱེད་པའི་གཞིར་གྱུར་པ། །ཉོན་མོངས་
འདམ་རྫབ་ཡེ་ཤེས་ཉི་མས་སྐེམ་པར་གྱིས། ། གཏི་མུག་མུན་པས་འཐོམས་ལ་ཤེས་
རབ་སྒྲོན་མེ་ཡི། ། སྣང་བ་བསྐྱེད་ཅིང་འདོད་ཆགས་ཆུ་ཀླུང་མྱུར་འབབ་པ། །
ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས་གྲུ་ཡིས་བསྒྲལ་ཏེ་ཁོང་ཁྲོའི་མེ་དཔུང་ནི། ། བཟོད་པའི་ཆུ་ཡིས་བསིལ་
63



-r:4ཝ་སྦཡ
naus
@wམ•ཚན་ཁག་བཀ
ག ་སrr•དཝགས་
་བ་
༧
,
ཧ
ས
མམྨནྟསྶ པྤཡྻ ས
-ཨུཔྤཡྻ
པའིai38
1
pg#*#*
ས
|
བྱ་ལེ་ལོའི་འདམ་རྫབ་ལས། ། བརྩོན་འགྲུས་སྟོབས་ཀྱིས་བརྒལ་ཞིང་སེར་སྣའི་དྲ་
བ་དག ། སྦྱིན་པའི་མཚོན་གྱིས་བཅད་དེ་རྣམ་རྟོག་དྲི་མ་རྣམས། ། བསམ་གཏན་
ཆུ་ཡིས་བཀྲུས་ལ་ཕྲག་དོག་ནགས་ཚལ་ནི། ། ཀུན་ལ་སྙོམས་པའི་སེམས་ཀྱི་གླང་
པོས་ རབ་ ཏུ་ གཞོམ། ། འདོད་ པའི་ཆང་གིས་མྱོས་ ཤིང་ ཤེས་ བཞིན་ ལྕགས་ཀྱུ་
དང་། ། བྲལ་ནས་སྡིག་དང་འདུ་འཛིའི་ནགས་ཚལ་རབ་རྒྱུ་བས། ། ངན་འགྲོའི་
གཡང་སར་ལྷུངས་གྱུར་སེམས་ཀྱི་ལག་ལྡན་ནི། ། དྲན་དང་ཏིང་འཛིན་ཞགས་
པས་རབ་ཏུ་བརྟན་པར་ཟུངས། ། ལུས་ནི་དོན་མེད་རྩོམ་པ་ཀུན་དོར་མུ་ཅོར་
གྱི། ། སྨྲ་བ་སྤངས་ནས་ཡིད་ནི་རབ་ཞིའི་བདེ་བ་ལ། ། རོ་མྱང་མེད་པར་རྩེ་གཅིག་
ཉིད་བཞག་གློ་བུར་གྱི། ། རྣམ་རྟོག་ཆུ་བུར་ཆུ་གཏེར་ཉིད་དུ་རོ་གཅིག་འགྱུར། །
རྨུགས་པའི་ཆུར་བྱིངས་ དྲན་པའི་ཤུགས་ཀྱིས་བརྒལ་བྱ་ཞིང་། ། རྟོག་པའི་རི་
དྭགས་མ་བཅིངས་པ་ཡིས་དལ་བར་གནས། ། ཞེན་པའི་རྩི་ནི་ཆགས་བྲལ་བློ་ཡིས་
སྦྱང་བྱ་སྟེ། ། ཐེ་ཚོམ་སྦྲུལ་མདུད་རང་བཞིན་ཤེས་པས་རང་གྲོལ་ཉིད། ། ཇི་ལྟར་
ཆུ་ནི་མ་དཀྲུགས་པ་ལས་དྭངས་འགྱུར་ཏེ། ། བྱི་དོར་ལྡན་པས་མེ་ལོང་གསལ་བར་
གཟུགས་བརྙན་མཐོང་། ། དེ་ བཞིན་ སེམས་ ཀྱང་མ་བཅོས་ པ་ ཉིད་ ལྷུན་གྲུབ་
ཀྱི། ། དེ་བཞིན་ཉིད་དེས་དྲན་དང་ལྡན་པས་ཡང་དག་རིག །འདི་ནི་འཁོར་
བའི་འབྲོག་དགོན་འཁྱམས་ལ་དབུགས་འབྱིན་ཉིད། ། ཉོན་མོངས་སྣ་ཚོགས་ནད་
ཀྱིས་གཟིར་ལ་སྨན་གྱི་མཆོག ། དགེ་བའི་ལུས་ནི་བརྟས་བྱེད་བདུད་རྩིའི་ཟས་
ཉིད་དེ། ། དེ་ཕྱིར་དོན་གཉེར་བློ་དང་ལྡན་པས་བསྟེན་པར་གྱིས། ། དེ་ལྟར་
རིགས་ཤིང༌ གྲོལ་ བའི་ ཚིག་ ཚངས་ པའི་ དབྱངས་ལྟར་སྙན་པ་དེ་དག་ ཐོས་ནས།
ཚིམ་ཞིང་མགུ་ལ་ཡི་རང་ཞིང༌། རབ་ཏུ་དགའ་བ་དང་ཡིད་བདེ་བར་གྱུར་ཏེ། ལོ་
མའི་སྤྱིལ་པོ་དང་བྲག་གི་བྱ་སྐྱིབས་དག་ཏུ་གནས་བཅས་ནས་ཡང་དག་པའི་དགེ་
བའི་བཤེས་གཉེན་ལ་ནི་གཙུག་གི་ནོར་བུ་ལྟར་བཀུར་ཞིང་། ཇི་སྐད་བསྟན་པའི་
གདམས་པ་ནི་ནན་ཏན་དུ་བྱེད། དུལ་བ་དང་དེད་པའི་སྤྱོད་ལམ་དང་ནི་ལྡན།
བསིལ་བ་དང་ཞི་བའི་དཀའ་ཐུབ་ཀྱིས་ལུས་སེམས་རབ་ཏུ་དྭངས་བ་ནི་ཐོབ་སྟེ།
།
ཁྱོས
་
64



་ ་ ་ ་
དེ་ལྟར་བསམ་གཏན་ལ་རྩེ་གཅིག་ཏུ་གནས་པ་ལས། ཡང་རེ་ཞིག་གི་ཚེ། ཕུ་བོ་
གསུམ་པོ་དག་སྔོན་གྱི་བག་ཆགས་ངན་པ་ལ་གོམས་པའི་སྟོབས་ཀྱིས་འདོད་པའི་
ལོངས་སྤྱོད་རྣམས་ནི་ཡོངས་སུ་དྲན། དཀའ་ཐུབ་སྤྱོད་པས་ནི་ཡིད་བྱུང་ཞིང་སྐྱོ་
བར་གྱུར་ནས་ཕྱི་རོལ་ཏུ་ཐོན་ཏེ་བདག་གི་ཡུལ་གྱི་ཕྱོགས་སུ་ལྟ་ཞིང་། དེའི་ཚེ་
གཞོན་ནུ་འདོད་ལྷའི་བུས་སྨྲས་པ། ཀྱི་ཧུད། ཁང་བཟང་དྲ་བ་ཅན་ན་པད་རྩ་
ལྟར་འཇམ་ལག་པའི་སྟེགས་བུ་ལ། ། མཆི་མའི་ཆུ་ཡིས་རབ་བཀང་མཁུར་ཚོས་
དམར་བའི་བུམ་པ་བཞག་ནས་ཙན་དན་གྱི། །དྲི་བསུང་ལྡན་པའི་ཤུགས་རིང་
རླུང་གིས་སྐྲ་ཡི་ཡལ་འདབ་བསྐྱོད་ཅིང་བིམ་པ་དང་། ། མཆུ་ མཛེས་ལྡན་པའི་
དགའ་མ་རྣམས་ནི་རང་བཞིན་ངན་པ་བདག་ལ་སྨེ་ཞིང་གནས། ། དེ་ཡི་སྨྲེ་ངག་སྒྲ་
སྙན་མ་ཐོས་ཀྱང་ནི་རྣ་བར་གདུང་བྱེད་ཟླ་བཞིན་མ། ། མདུན་དུ་མེད་ཀྱང་ཡིད་
ཀྱིས་གསལ་བར་མཐོང་ངོ་ཀུན་ད་གཞོན་ནུ་ལྟར་འཇམ་ལུས། ། བདག་གི་སྙིང་དུ་
མཚོན་བཞིན་ཟུག་རྔུ་སྐྱེ་བྱེད་སྔོན་ཆད་ཚིམ་མེད་བདེ་སྟེར་མ། ། ཁྱོད་ཀྱིས་བདག་
ལ་སྡུག་བསྔལ་བྱས་སོ་ཀྱེ་མ་ཀྲྀ་ཎ་ས་རའི་མིག་ཅན་དེ། ། རིང་དུ་གནས་ཀྱང་ལུས་
ལ་ཞུགས་པ་བཞིན་གྱུར་རྙེད་དཀའི་དཔལ་དེས་བདག་བཅོམ་མོ། ། གཞོན་ནུ་
དྲག་པོས་སྨྲས་པ། ཀྱེ་མ་བདག་གིས་གཞུ་ནི་ལྕགས་ལྟར་སྲ་བ་བརྡུངས་ཚེ་རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་
སྒྲ་སྙན་ནི། ། གནམ་ལྕགས་འབབ་པ་ལྟ་བུ་ཐོས་ཚེ་རླུང་གི་འཁྲི་ཤིང་བཞིན་དུ་གང་
གི་སྙིང་། ། རབ་ཏུ་འདར་བའི་དགྲ་བོ་དེ་དག་དེང་འདིར་མཆེ་བ་མེད་པའི་གཉིས་
འཐུང་ལྟར། ། བདག་གི་ལག་པ་མཚོན་བྲལ་ཤེས་ནས་སེང་གེ་བཞིན་དུ་དོགས་པ་
མེད་པར་རྒྱུ། །གཞོན་ནུ་མུན་པ་ཅན་གྱིས་སྨྲས་པ། ཀྱི་ཧུད། བདག་ཅག་གཉེན་
རྣམས་སྤངས་ནས་སྐྱེ་བོ་གཞན་ལ་གུག་བྱེད་དོན་ལྡན་བྱ་བ་དོར་ནས་དོན་མེད་
དཀའ་ཐུབ་བྱེད་ལ་བརྩོན། ། ལུས་ངན་ལྟ་བུའི་ནོར་ཡང་རྩྭ་བཞིན་དོར་ནས་རྩྭ་
དང་ཤིང་ཤུན་བསྟེན་ཞིང་རིན་ཆེན་རྒྱུན་རྣམས་རབ་སྤངས་ཚེམ་བུའི་གོས་འདི་
རྙེད། ། རོ་བརྒྱ་ལྡན་པ་བཏང་ནས་རྩ་བ་རྩུབ་མོ་འདི་ཡིས་འཚོ་བྱེད་སྤྱོད་ལམ་
སྤངས་ལ་གཉིད་ནི་ཅི་བདེར་ལོག་ཅིང་སད་པ་ཡི། ། བདེ་བ་དེ་སྤངས་བསམ་
ཏ5



1
:|:
::31:11
:
4
sI
-
11
-r-r
!!
: -
''-s: -
-
" -
-'s1
1
|ཀ བས
གཏན་ཞེས་བྱ་ཅི་ཞིག་དོན་གཉེར་དཀའ་ཐུབ་ཆོམ་རྐུན་འདི་ཡིས་ས་མཐར་དོན་
མཐུན་བཞིན་དུ་བདག་བཅོམ་མོ། ། ཞེས་སྨྲ་ཞིང་ཕུག་ཏུ་ཞུགས་ནས་ཀྱང་བསམ་
གཏན་དོན་དུ་མི་གཉེར་ལ། གཉིད་དང་གཡེང་བ་འབའ་ཞིག་གིས་དུས་འདའ་
བར་བྱེད་དོ། ། དེ་ལྟར་རིག་ནས་བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་དཔའ་སེམས་དཔའ་ཆེན་པོ་དྲི་
མ་མེད་པའི་ཡེ་ ཤེས་བློ་གྲོས་ དེས། སྐབས་འགར་ གཞོན་ནུ་དེ་དག་བོས་ནས།
འདི་སྐད་ཅེས་སྨྲས་སོ། ཇི་ལྟར་འབར་བ་འཁྲུགས་པའི་མེ་དོང་ནས། ། ཐར་ཚེ་
སླར་ཡང་དེར་འཇུག་རིགས་མ་ཡིན། ། སྐྱོན་བརྒྱ་ལྡན་པའི་ཁྱིམ་སྤངས་ ཞི་ བ་
ཡི། ། ནགས་སུ་གནས་ཚེ་ད་ཡང་ཁྱིམ་དྲན་ནམ། ། ཐོག་མཐའ་མི་མངོན་འཁོར་
བའི་རྒྱ་མཚོ་ལས། ། སྒྲོལ་བའི་གྲུ་འདི་ཚེགས་ཆེས་རྙེད་གྱུར་པ། ། ཉོན་མོངས་པ་
རེས་ཕྲལ་ནས་སྡུག་བསྔལ་གྱི། ། རྦ་ཀློང་དྲག་པོས་བཅོམ་པར་གྱུར་ཏ་རེ། ། རིང་
ནས་འབྲལ་མ་མྱོང་བར་རབ་ལྕི་བའི། ། སྡུག་བསྔལ་ཁུར་འདིས་ད་དུང་ཡོངས་མ་
དུབ། ། རང་ལ་ཕན་སླད་དཀའ་ཐུབ་རིན་ཆེན་གྱི། །ཅོད་པན་འཛིན་ལ་ངལ་
གྱུར་སྙིང་འདི་འཚར། ། འདོད་པའི་བདེ་བ་དུག་གི་མངར་བའི་རོས། ། ལུས་
འཇོམས་ལྟ་བུ་འདི་ལ་ཆགས་མི་གཏོང་། ། བླ་མེད་བདེ་ཆེན་མི་ཟད་དམ་ཆོས་
ཀྱི། ། བདུད་རྩིའི་བུམ་བཟང་འདོར་བྱེད་དེ་བཞིན་ནོ། ། རྣམ་པར་འཐོར་རླུང་
དྲག་པོས་དཀྲུགས་པ་ཡི། ། ནམ་མཁར་ཆུ་འཛིན་ཕུང་པོའི་སྐབས་མི་འབྱེད། །
དེ་བཞིན་སེམས་ནི་རྟོགས་པས་གཡེང་རྣམས་ལ། ། རྨད་བྱུང་ཡོན་ཏན་འཛིན་
པའི་གོ་སྐབས་མེད། ། གང་ཞིག་རིན་ཆེན་རྟ་བབས་མཛེས་ལྡན་ཁང་པར་བག་
འཁུམས་ཉལ་ཞིང་རྟག་ཏུ་བྱི་དོར་གྱི། ། ལུས་ནི་རྡུལ་གྱི་ཐིགས་པས་རབ་བཀྲུས་
ངལ་བའི་དབུགས་ནི་ཚ་བས་མགྲིན་པ་བསྐུམས་གྱུར་དང་། ། ཡུད་ཙམ་བདེ་སྟེར་
དགའ་མ་དེ་ཡི་སྐྲ་ཞགས་འཛིན་པས་མགུལ་མཆིང་སེན་མོས་རྨ་གཏོད་ཅིང་། །
འཁུ་བར་བརྩོན་པའི་དམོད་ཚིག་མདས་ཕུག་བཞིན་གྱི་པད་མོ་ཟུམ་པས་ཡིད་ཀྱི་
བུང་བ་བཅིངས། །གཉེན་གྱི་སྐྱེ་བོས་མི་སྙན་སྐྱི་བུངས་བྱེད་ཅིང་དགྲ་བོ་རྣམས་ནི་
དུས་ཀྱི་ མུན་པ་ལྟར། ། མི་ ལྡོག་འཐིབས་ཀྱིས་ གནོད་བྱེད་ལོངས་སྤྱོད་དག་ནི་
1:
66



འབྱོར་ཚེ་ངོམས་མེད་སྲུང་བས་ ཤ་ ཐང་ལ། ། མྱུར་དུ་བརླགས་པས་ངུ་འབོད་
བསྐྱེད་ཅིང་བགྲང་ཡས་སྡུག་བསྔལ་རྣམས་ནི་རྦ་རླབས་དྲག་པོ་ལྟར། ། རྒྱུན་མི་
ཆད་དེ་མི་འདོད་ཆར་ཆེན་ལྟར་འབབ་འདོད་པ་མུན་ནང་གསེར་བཞིན་བཙལ་མི་
རྙེད། ། དེ་ཕྱིར་ཉེས་མང་ཁྱིམ་ལ་ཆགས་པ་རབ་ཐོངས་རང་ཉིད་འཇོམས་འགྱུར་
གྱི་ནའི་བྱ་བ་དོར། །ཐར་པའི་བདེ་ལ་འདུན་པས་དཀའ་ཐུབ་དོན་གཉེར་མི་གཡོ་
རྩེ་གཅིག་ཏིང་འཛིན་གནས་པར་གྱིས། ། སྲིད་དང་ཐར་པའི་སྐྱོན་དང་ཡོན་ཏན་
འདི་ཞེས་གཞན་འགས་བསྐལ་པ་བྱེ་བར་གཡེལ་མེད་པར། ། ལུས་ནི་བྱེ་བ་ལུས་རེ་
བཞིན་ཡང་ལྕེ་ནི་བྱེ་བ་སྤྲུལ་ཏེ་བགྲངས་ཀྱང་ཟད་མི་འགྱུར། ། ཚུལ་དེ་དང་དེ་ལྟ་
བུ་དག་ གིས་ རྗེས་ སུ་ གདམས་ཤིང་། དེ་ལྟར་བདག་ཉིད་ཆེན་ པོ་དེས་ཇི་ལྟར་
བཀའ་བསྩལ་བ་བཞིན། ལེགས་པའི་བློ་གྲོས་ལ་སོགས་པ་གཞོན་ནུར་གྱུར་པ་དེ་
དག་གིས་ཀྱང་བརྩོན་པ་དང་སྒྲུབ་པ་དང་། འབད་པས་རིང་པོར་མ་ཐོགས་པར་
བསམ་གཏན་བཞི་དང༌། ཚད་མེད་པ་དང་། གཟུགས་མེད་པའི་སྙོམས་པར་
འཇུག་པ་དང་། ཟིལ་གྱིས་གནོན་པའི་སྐྱེ་མཆེད་དང༌། མངོན་པར་ཤེས་པ་དང་།
ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན་གྱི་སྒོ་བརྒྱ་སྟོང་དུ་མ་མངོན་དུ་གྱུར་ཏོ། དེ་དག་ཡིད་ནི་ཞི་བའི་ཆུ་
ཡིས་བཀྲུས་པས་རབ་དྭངས་ཤིང་། ། བསམ་གཏན་ལ་ཆགས་མིག་གཉིས་གཡོ་
མེད་ངང་ཚུལ་དེས་པ་ཐོབ། ། ཡོན་ཏན་མང་པོས་ཤིན་ཏུ་གང་བའི་ཆོས་ཀྱི་བང་
མཛོད་དུ། ། ཡངས་ པའི་ ཏིང་ འཛིན་ བརྒྱ་ ཕྲག་ སྒོ་ ནས་ རབ་ ཏུ་ ཞུགས་ པར་
གྱུར། ། གདམས་པའི་ཆུ་ཀླུང་སྟོང་ཕྲག་ལེགས་སྡུད་དྲན་པའི་གདེངས་ཅན་བདག་
པོས་དབང་བྱས་ཤིང༌། ། རྫུ་འཕྲུལ་ཏིང་འཛིན་རྦ་རླབས་རབ་འཕྲོ་མངོན་པར་
ཤེས་ པའི་ནོར་བུ་དུ་མས་ གཏམས། ། རྣམ་ པར་ ཐར་ པའི་ གཏིང་ མཐའ་ རབ་
ཡངས་ཉོན་མོངས་མེ་ཡིས་སྐེམས་པར་ནུས་མིན་པ། །བྱང་ཆུབ་ཡན་ལག་རིན་
ཆེན་འབྱུང་གནས་བསམ་གཏན་རྒྱ་མཚོའི་གཏིང་དཔག་སུ་ཡིས་ནུས། ། དེ་ལྟར་
དཀའ་ཐུབ་ཀྱི་ཚལ་ནི་འདོད་པ་དག་ལས་དབེན་ཞིང་། མི་དགེ་བའི་ཆོས་རྣམས་
ལས་རིང་དུ་བྱེད་པའོ། ཞེས་བྱ་བ་དང་། སེམས་གཡེངས་པ་ནི་ཉེས་པ་དུ་མ་
67
1
:



་
འབྱུང་ཞིང་། ཞི་བ་ནི་ཡོན་ཏན་ཐམས་ཅད་བསྐྱེད་པའོ། ཞེས་བསམ་གཏན་གྱི་
ཆེ་བ་བརྗོད་པ་དང༌། རིམ་གྲོ་སྐྱེད་དེ་ཆོས་མཉན་པར་བྱའོ་ཞེས་ཀྱང་སྦྱར་བར་
བྱའོ། ། རབ་ཏུ་བྱེད་པ་དྲུག་པའོ། ། ། །
2
་
་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་



རབ་བྱེད་བདུན་པ་དགེ་བའི་བཤེས་
གཉེན་གྱི་ཆེ་བ་བརྗོད་ནས་ཤེས་
རབ་ཀྱི་བསླབ་པ་ལ་
བསྔགས་པ།
དེ་ནས་རེ་ཞིག་སོ་གའི་དཔལ་གྱི་དྲ་བས་ཕྱོགས་ཀུན་ཡོངས་སུ་བཅིངས་ཤིང་།
འབིགས་བྱེད་ཀྱི་རླུང་གིས་བསྐུལ་བའི་རྩེ་དགས་སེམས་ཀུན་ཏུ་གཡེངས་པ། ལྗོན་
ཤིང་མེ་ཏོག་སྣ་ཚོགས་ ཀྱི་ལང་ཚོ་དར་ལ་བབས་ པར་ གྱུར་ པའི་ཚེ། བྱང་ཆུབ་
སེམས་དཔའ་སེམས་དཔའ་ཆེན་པོ་དྲི་མ་མེད་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས་བློ་གྲོས་འཁོར་དང་
བཅས་པ་དང་། ལེགས་པའི་བློ་གྲོས་ལ་སོགས་པ་གཞོན་ནུར་གྱུར་པ་དེ་དག་རིམ་
གྱིས་སྤོས་ངད་ ལྡན་ པའི་རི་བོའི་རྩེ་མོ་སྣ་ ཚོགས་ ལྟ་ན་སྡུག་པ། བྲག་རི་དང་།
ནགས་ཚལ་དང༌། སྨན་ལྗོངས་རྣམ་པ་སྣ་ཚོགས་ཡིད་དུ་འོང་བ་དག་ཏུ་རྒྱུ་ཞིང་
སོང་སོང་བ་ལས། རི་བོ་དེའི་ངོགས་ཤིག་ན་དྭངས་བསིལ་ཞེས་བྱ་བ་ཡིད་བཞིན་
གྱི་ཆུ་གཏེར་ཡན་ལག་བརྒྱད་དང་ལྡན་པའི་ཆུ་བཻ་ཌཱུརྱའི་ཞུན་མ་ལྟར་སྔོ་ཞིང་དྭངས་
པས་ནི་རབ་ཏུ་གང་། པདྨ་དང་། ཨུཏྤལ་དང་། ཀུ་མུད་དང༌། པདྨ་དཀར་པོ་
དག་གིས་ནི་ཁེབས་པར་གྱུར། ངུར་པ་དང༌། ཁྲུང་ཁྲུང་དང་། ཆུ་བྱ་སྣ་ཚོགས་ནི་
ཁྲུས་ཀྱི་ཕྱིར་འཇུག་ཅིང་བྱུ་རུ་ལྟར་དམར་བའི་སོར་མོས་ཆུ་ཐིགས་ཀུན་ཏུ་འཐོར་
བར་བྱེད་ལ། ཉེ་འཁོར་ན་ཨ་ཀ་རུ་དང་། ཙན་དན་ས་མཆོག་དང༌། རྒྱ་ཤུག་
དང༌། ཛཱ་ཏིའི་ཤིང་དང་། ཨ་ཤུ་ཏྟཱ དང་། ཆུ་ཤིང་ལ་སོགས་པའི་ཤིང་ལྗོན་པ་
དང་། འཁྲི་ཤིང་མཆོག་ ཏུ་རྒྱས་ཤིང་མཛེས་པ་རྣམས་ནི་ཡིད་བཞིན་གྱི་མཚོ་དེ་
བལྟ་བའི་ཕྱིར་འདུས་པ་ལྟར་འདུག དེ་ལ་འདུས་པའི་རྨ་བྱ་དང་། ནེ་ཙོ་དང་།
ཤང་ཤང་དང་། བྱ་ ཀ་ ལན་ ཀ་ལ་ སོགས་ པ་ རྣམས་ ནི་ ཀུན་ ཏུ་ དགའ་ བའི་ གླུ་
69



དབྱངས་ཀྱིས་བསྔགས་པ་བརྗོད་པ་བཞིན་དུ་འདུག་པ་དེར་ཕྱིན་པར་གྱུར་ཏོ། དེ་
ཚེ་བསོད་ནམས་ལྡན་པའི་མིག ། པད་མའི་འདབ་ལྟར་རབ་ཡངས་པས། །
མཛེས་སྡུག་འཁྱིལ་བའི་རི་མོ་ཅན། །དྲི་མེད་བདུད་རྩིའི་ཆུ་གཏེར་མཐོང་། །
ཤེལ་ཕྲེང་མུ་ཏིག་དྲ་བ་ལྟར། ། རབ་མཛེས་ལྦུ་བའི་ཚོགས་ཀྱིས་དཀྲིགས། ། ཁ་
དོག་མཚུངས་ལ་འགྲན་འདོད་པས། །ནམ་མཁའི་སྐར་ཕྲེང་བརྐུས་པ་བཞིན། །
བུང་བ་འཕུར་བའི་སོར་གདུབ་ནི། ། མཛེས་ལྡན་བསེར་བུའི་ལག་སོར་གྱིས། །
རབ་བསྐྱོད་རྦ་རླབས་ཕྲེང་བ་ལས། ། ཡ་མཚན་སྒྲེང་བར་བྱེད་པ་བཞིན། ། རྨ་
བྱའི་མགྲིན་ལྟར་རབ་སྔོ་བའི། །ཀུ་ཤ་གཞོན་ནུའི་ལག་རྩེ་ཡིས། ། ཆུ་ཐིགས་
འཐོར་བས་ཕྱོགས་ཀྱི་ནི། ། མུན་པའི་དྲི་མ་འཁྲུ་བ་བཞིན། ། ལོ་འདབ་སྡུ་གུའི་
ལན་ཚར་ཅན། ། མེ་ཏོག་ནུ་རྒྱས་སྐེད་ངོས་ཕྲ། ། འཁྲི་ཤིང་ན་ཆུང་ཡིད་བཞིན་
མཚོར། ། ཁྲུས་ཀྱི་སླད་དུ་འཇུག་འདོད་བཞིན། ། དེ་མཐོང་གདུང་བས་མཚམས་
སྤྲིན་ལྟར། ། དམར་བའི་བཞིན་ལྡན་གེ་སར་ཅན། ། ཡལ་གའི་ལག་བརྐྱངས་ལྗང་
སྔོན་གྱི། ། ལོ་མའི་གོས་ཀྱིས་གཡོགས་པ་བཞིན། ། རི་བོང་ཅན་གཟུགས་དྭངས་
པའི་མཚོར། ། སྣང་ལས་མཛའ་བོར་འཁྲུལ་བ་ཡིས། །ཀུནྡ་ལྟར་དཀར་ངང་མོའི་
ཁྱུ། ། ཕན་ཚུན་ རྒྱུ་ ཞིང་ འབོད་ སྒྲོག་བྱེད། ། ཨིན་ཌ་ རྙིལ་ ལྟར་ རབ་ དྭངས་
ཤིང་། ། ཡ་མཚན་མང་པོའི་གཟུགས་བརྙན་བཀྲ། ། ནགས་ཀྱི་པད་མོའི་སྐེད་
ངོས་སུ། ། དྭངས་བསིལ་མེ་ལོང་དེ་མཐོང་གྱུར། ། དེ་ལྟར་ཡིད་བཞིན་གྱི་མཚོ་
རབ་ཏུ་དྭངས་བ་དྭངས་བསིལ་ཞེས་བྱ་བ་དེའི་འགྲམ་དུ། ལྗོན་པའི་ཤིང་ཡལ་ག་
དང་ལོ་འདབ་རབ་ཏུ་རྒྱས་པའི་དྲུང་ན། ཟླ་བ་ཆུ་ཤེལ་གྱི་ནོར་བུའི་རྡོ་ལ། བྱང་
ཆུབ་སེམས་དཔའ་སེམས་དཔའ་ཆེན་པོ་དྲི་མ་མེད་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས་བློ་གྲོས་དེ་ཉིད་
བཞུགས་ཤིང་། འཁོར་རྣམས་ཀྱང་འདུས་ཏེ་ཕྱག་འཚལ་ནས་འཁོད་པར་གྱུར་
ཏོ། ། དེའི་ཚེ་བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་དཔའ་སེམས་དཔའ་ཆེན་པོ་དྲི་མ་མེད་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས་
བློ་གྲོས་ཀྱི་ཉི་མས་ཤེས་བྱའི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་རབ་ཏུ་གསལ་བའི་གདུལ་བྱ་རྣམས་ཀྱི་
ཁམས་དང་། དབང་པོ་དང་། བསམ་པ་དང་། བག་ལ་ཉལ་དང་། རང་བཞིན་
བསམ་



་ ་ ་ ་ .:.
T
ITI TI TITI་ ས་
པ་བ་
ཇི་ལྟ་བར་ཐུགས་སུ་ཆུད་དེ། འདུལ་བར་བབས་པའི་དུས་མཁྱེན་པ་དེ་ཉིད་ཀྱིས།
གཞོན་ནུ་དེ་དག་མ་རིག་པའི་གཉིད་ལས་ཡང་དག་པར་སློང་བ་ལ་བསྐུལ་བའི་ཕྱིར་
ཚངས་པའི་རྒྱལ་པོ་ལྟ་བུའི་གསུང་གིས་འདི་སྐད་ཅེས་བཀའ་བསྩལ་བ། ཀྱེ་གཞོན་
ནུ་དག གང་གི་རྒྱུད་ནི་བསམ་གཏན་ཆུ་ཡི་རབ་བརླན་དགེ་བ་ཡི། །ས་བོན་
བཏབ་ལས་བྱང་ཆུབ་ལྗོན་པའི་མྱུ་གུ་ལེགས་འཁྲུངས་པ། ། བརྩོན་འགྲུས་རྐང་
པས་ཐར་པའི་ལམ་ནི་བགྲོད་གང་གདམས་པ་ཡི། ། བཅུད་ཀྱིས་སུ་ཞིག་ཡེ་ཤེས་
ཁམས་ནི་བརྟས་པར་གྱུར་པ་སྨོས། ། དེ་ནས་གཞོན་ནུ་དེ་དག་གིས་ཕྱག་འཚལ་ཏེ་
མུན་པ་ཅན་གྱིས་གསོལ་བ། བདག་ནི་བསམ་གཏན་ལ་ཞུགས་ཉིན་མཚན་དུ། །
རྟོག་དཔྱོད་མིག་གིས་ཀུན་ཏུ་རབ་བལྟས་ཀྱང་། ། རྟག་ཆད་ཆུ་འཛིན་སྟུག་པོས་
ཡོངས་བསྒྲིབས་ནས། ། ཡང་དག་བདེན་པའི་མཁའ་ནི་ཡོངས་མ་མཐོང་། ། དྲག་
པོས་གསོལ་བ། བདག་ གི་ དྲན་ པའི་སྐྱེས་བུ་འབད་པ་བརྒྱས། །ཏིང་འཛིན་
ལྕགས་ཀྱུས་བཀུག་ཀྱང་ཉོན་མོངས་ཀྱི། ། གཡང་སར་མངོན་རྒྱུག་སེམས་ཀྱི་གླང་
པོ་འདིས། ། འདམ་བུའི་ཚལ་བཞིན་རེ་བ་འཇོམས་པ་སྙམ། ། འདོད་ལྷའི་བུས་
གསོལ་བ། བདག་ནི་དཀའ་ཐུབ་གྲུར་ཞུགས་འདོད་པ་ཡི། ། ཆུ་བོ་བརྒལ་ཀྱང་
མངོན་ཤེས་རྫུ་འཕྲུལ་དང༌། ། ཡེ་ཤེས་རིན་ཆེན་འབྱུང་གནས་ཐར་པའི་གླིང་། །
འཐོབ་པར་མ་གྱུར་དོན་མེད་ངལ་བས་བསླུས། ། གཞོན་ནུ་དགེ་བ་ཅན་ གྱིས་
གསོལ་བ། བདག་གི་མིག་ནི་ཁྱོད་ཀྱི་ཞབས་སེན་དམར་བའི་ཆུ་སྐྱེས་ལ། ། བུང་བ་
བཞིན་དུ་རེ་བས་ལྟ་བྱེད་ཡིད་ཀྱི་ཤིང་རྟ་ནི། ། བསམ་ཡས་ཡོན་ཏན་རི་བོ་འདི་ལ་
རབ་ བརྟགས་ལོག་ལྟ་ཡི། ། རླུང་གི་གཡོ་མེད་བསམ་ གཏན་ མཆོག་ ཐོབ་དོན་
གཉེར་གཞན་ཅི་མཆིས། ། གཞོན་ནུ་མཉེས་གཤེན་བཟང་པོས་གསོལ་བ། ཉོན་
མོངས་བུད་ཤིང་སྣ་ཚོགས་ལས་ཀྱི་རླུང་གིས་གཙུབས་པ་ལས། ། སྡུག་བསྔལ་རྟ་
གདོང་འབར་བས་འགྲོ་འདི་བསྲེགས་མཐོང་དེ་དག་རྣམས། ། ཡོངས་སྐྱོབ་ཉིད་
སེམས་དེ་དོན་བརྩོན་པས་རྟག་ཏུ་མི་སྐྱོ་བའི། ། བདུད་རྩི་ལས་གཞན་ཁྱད་པར་ཅི་
ཡང་བདག་ནི་མི་འཚལ་ལོ། ། གཞོན་ནུ་ལེགས་པའི་བློ་གྲོས་ཀྱིས་གསོལ་བ། ཁྱོད་
7



389%Y/22:31
:
:22
1:05
ཀྱི་བཀའ་དྲིན་བདུད་རྩིས་བདག་ཅག་དགེ་བའི་ལུས་བརྟས་གཟུང་དང་ཏིང་འཛིན་
མངོན་ཤེས་ཀྱི། ། མིག་ནི་རབ་དྭངས་རྫུ་འཕྲུལ་ཤུགས་ལྡན་རྣམས་མང་རྨད་བྱུང་
ཡོན་ཏན་སྣ་ཚོགས་ཡན་ལག་རྒྱས། ། ད་ནི་བྱིན་རླབས་འོད་ཟེར་གསལ་བས་
བདག་གི་སྙིང་གི་པད་མོ་རབ་ཕྱེ་མ་རིག་པའི། ། མུན་པ་བཅོམ་ནས་གདོད་ནས་
རྣམ་དག་ཆོས་དབྱིངས་ཡེ་ཤེས་རྟོགས་པའི་གཏེར་མཛོད་བསྟན་དུ་གསོལ། ། དེ་
སྐད་ཅེས་གསོལ་བ་བཏབ་པ་དང་། དེ་ནས་བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་དཔའ་སེམས་དཔའ་
ཆེན་པོ་དྲི་མ་མེད་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས་བློ་གྲོས་དེས་ཡང་དག་པའི་དོན་ཆོས་ཀྱི་རྣམ་གྲངས་
ཚིགས་སུ་བཅད་དེ་བཀའ་བསྩལ་བ། གང་ཞིག་གདོད་མ་ཉིད་ནས་ཆོས་ཀུན་
གྱི། ། ངོ་བོ་ཉིད་གནས་དེ་ཉིད་མ་ཤེས་ལས། ། འཁོར་བ་ཞེས་གྲགས་རང་བཞིན་
ཡོངས་ཤེས་པས། ། མྱ་ངན་འདའ་འགྱུར་འདི་ཉིད་ཡོངས་རྟོགས་ཀྱིས། ། ཇི་ལྟར་
ནམ་མཁའ་ལྟར་མེད་གཟུང་བྱ་མིན། ། དབུས་མཐའ་མི་མངོན་བྱུང་མིན་ཟད་
པའང་མིན། ། དངོས་པོར་མ་གྲུབ་དངོས་མེད་ཉིད་མ་གྲུབ། ། དངོས་ཀུན་གོ་
སྐབས་འབྱིན་བྱེད་དགོས་པའང་མེད། ། དེ་བཞིན་ཆོས་ཀུན་གདོད་ནས་སྐྱེ་འགག་
མེད། །གང་དུའང་གནས་མིན་རྟག་ཆད་མཐའ་དང་བྲལ། ། སྣ་མིན་སྟོང་མིན་
གཉིས་མེད་མིན་གཞན་མིན། ། ཆོས་ཅན་ཆོས་ཉིད་དབྱེར་མེད་དེ་བཞིན་ཉིད། །
ཇི་ལྟར་དག་པའི་མཁར་ཡང་གློ་བུར་གྱི། ། སྤྲིན་ཚོགས་སྟུག་པོར་རབ་འཁྲིགས་ཁ་
དོག་དབྱིབས། ། སྣ་ཚོགས་སྣང་ཡང་དེ་ཡིས་གོས་མིན་ཞིང་། ། མཁའ་དང་ཆུ་
འཛིན་ཐ་དད་གྱུར་པ་མེད། ། དེ་བཞིན་དག་པའི་སེམས་ལས་གློ་བུར་གྱི། ། མ་
རིག་ལས་དང་ཉོན་མོངས་སྡུག་བསྔལ་ཚོགས། ། མེད་བཞིན་སྣང་མོད་སྣང་བཞིན་
ཡོངས་མ་གྲུབ། ། ཆོས་དབྱིངས་འགྱུར་མེད་དེ་དང་ཐ་དད་མེད། ། ཇི་ལྟར་སྤྲིན་
དང་བྲལ་ཚེ་ དྭངས་བའི་མཁར། ། ཉི་ཟླ་ སྐར་ཕྲེང་ གཟུགས་ བརྙན་ སྣ་ ཚོགས་
བཀྲ། ། དེ་དག་མཁའ་ལས་གཞན་དུ་གནས་མིན་ཅིང༌། ། འོད་ཟེར་མཐའ་ཡས་
མཁའ་དང་དབྱེར་མེད་འཇུག ། དེ་བཞིན་སྒྲིབ་པ་བྲལ་ཚེ་དག་པ་ཡི། ། དབྱིངས་
སུ་ཡེ་ཤེས་འཕྲིན་ལས་སྣ་ཚོགས་པ། ། སྨོན་ལམ་གདུལ་བྱའི་དབང་གིས་དཔག་
1:|:
1:|:#*
*
#
**
#*#
|



"""་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་་
I
ས་
མེད་དག ། ཆོས་ཀྱི་དབྱིངས་དང་གཉིས་སུ་མེད་པར་འཆར། ། གང་ཞིག་ཁྱིམ་
ནང་མུན་པ་ལོ་སྟོང་དུ། ། བསགས་པའང་ཁྱིམ་བྲལ་སྐད་ཅིག་སྣང་བས་ཁྱབ། །
མུན་པ་གར་ཡང་སོང་མིན་སྣང་བ་ནི། ། བསྐྱེད་པ་མེད་ཀྱང་དེ་ལྟར་མཐོང་བར་
འགྱུར། ། མ་རིག་འཐིབས་པོ་བཅོམ་ཚེ་འཁོར་བ་ཡི། ། འཁྲུལ་བ་ཀུན་བྲལ་ཡེ་
ཤེས་སྣང་བ་རྒྱས། ། འཁྲུལ་བ་འགག་མིན་ཡེ་ཤེས་ཐོབ་མེད་ཀྱང་། ། འཁོར་བ་མྱ་
ངན་འདས་ཞེས་ཐ་སྙད་འཇུག ། གང་ཞིག་རྩྭ་ཡི་ཞགས་པ་དུག་སྦྲུལ་སྣང་། ། དེ་
ལ་སྐྲག་པས་འབྲོས་བརྩོན་ངལ་བ་འཐོབ། ། དྲུང་དུ་ཕྱིན་ཚེ་དེ་ཉིད་ཤེས་པས་
གྲོལ། ། སྦྲུལ་ཞིག་ཕྱི་ནས་ཞགས་པར་གྱུར་པ་མིན། ། སེམས་ནི་ཉོན་མོངས་རྟོག་
པར་རབ་སྣང་བ། ། སྤོང་བར་བརྩོན་པས་རྣམ་གྲོལ་འགྱུར་མིན་ཏེ། རང་གི་
མཚན་ཉིད་ཤེས་པས་ཡོངས་སུ་གྲོལ། ། སྔོན་ཆད་མ་དག་ཕྱི་ནས་ དག་པའང་
མིན། ། སྐྱེས་བུ་སྐོམ་པ་གང་ཞིག་སྨིག་རྒྱུའི་ཆུ། ། འཐུང་འདོད་རྗེས་བསྙེགས་
ལྷག་པར་གདུང་བ་འཕེལ། ། དེ་ནི་བཏུང་བྱ་མ་ཡིན་མཁས་པ་རྣམས། ། དོན་དུ་
མི་གཉེར་ངལ་ བ་སྤངས་ཏེ་གནས། ། འདི་ནི་ ཐར་པའམ་མྱ་ངན་འདས་པའོ་
ཞེས། ། གང་ཞིག་འཐོབ་འདོད་རྟག་ཏུ་སྲེད་པ་འཕེལ། །འཐོབ་པར་བྱར་མེད་
མངོན་པར་རྟོགས་པའང་མེད། ། དེ་ལྟར་ཤེས་པས་མྱ་ངན་འདས་ཞེས་བྱ། །
གཉིད་སོང་རྨི་ལམ་བདེ་སྡུག་སྣ་ཚོགས་དག ། མྱོང་ཡང་མ་གྲུབ་སད་ཚེ་དེ་ལྟར་
ཤེས། ། འཇིག་ རྟེན་ འཁྲུལ་ བའི་ སྣང་ བ་ སྣ་ ཚོགས་ པ། ། སྣང་ ཞིང༌ མ་གྲུབ་
འཕགས་པས་ཡང་དག་རྟོགས། ། སྒྱུ་མ་མཁས་པས་སྒྱུ་མའི་དངོས་མེད་པར། །
ཤེས་བཞིན་སྒྱུ་མ་སྣ་ཚོགས་རང་དགར་སྤྲུལ། ། འཕགས་རྣམས་གནས་གཞན་གྱུར་
པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས་ཀྱིས། ། རྣམ་འཕྲུལ་མཐའ་ཡས་བདེན་གཉིས་དབྱེར་མེད་སྟོན། ། ས་
སྟེང་ཆུ་རླུང་རྣམ་ པ་ ཐ་དད་ པ། ། རྒྱུ་མཚོར་ཞུགས་ཚེ་དབྱེར་མེད་རོ་ གཅིག་
འགྱུར། ། དད་དང་སྙིང་རྗེ་ཡོན་ཏན་དཔག་མེད་ཚོགས། ། དབྱིངས་སུ་རོ་གཅིག་
རྟོགས་པ་གཅིག་གིས་གྲོལ། ། འདི་ལ་བདག་མེད་སྲོག་དང་གང་ཟག་མེད། །
བྱེད་པོ་ཡོད་མིན་བཅིངས་དང་གྲོལ་བ་མེད། ། འབྲས་བུ་དང་ནི་རྒྱུ་མེད་སྟོང་ཉིད་



པ
།'
s
s:
:
sn
:
,
,
M i
s
s!!!
!!
As
:
*
"
-
..
.-
JA
,
4
,
41
ཀྱི། ། རྒྱུ་རྐྱེན་རྟེན་ཅིང་འབྲེལ་བར་འབྱུང་བ་ཡི། ། སྲིད་དང་མྱ་ངན་འདས་ཞེས་
ཐ་སྙད་ཙམ། ། དེ་ལ་བླང་དོར་དགག་སྒྲུབ་ག་ལ་ཡོད། ། གདོད་ནས་དག་པ་ནམ་
མཁའི་མཚན་ཉིད་དེ། ། ཆོས་རྣམས་ཐམས་ཅད་དེ་ལྟར་ཤེས་པར་གྱིས། ། ཆོས་
ཀྱི་རྣམ་གྲངས་འདི་དག་བསྟན་པ་ན་གཞོན་ནུ་དེ་དག་བདེན་པ་རྣམས་ལ་ཆོས་ཤེས་
པ་དང་རྗེས་སུ་ཤེས་པའི་བཟོད་པ་བླ་ན་མེད་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་མིག་ཐུར་གྱིས་ཆོས་
དང་གང་ཟག་ལ་བདག་ཏུ་ལྟ་བའི་ལིང་ཏོག་རབ་ཏུ་བྲལ་ནས་ཆོས་ཤེས་པ་དང་རྗེས་
སུ་ཤེས་པའི་ཤེས་པ་དྭངས་ཤིང་རབ་རིབ་མེད་ལ་གསལ་བ་འཐོབ་སྟེ་ཆོས་རྣམས་ལ་
ཆོས་ཀྱི་མིག་རྡུལ་མེད་ཅིང་དྲི་མ་དང་བྲལ་བ་རྣམ་པར་དག་པས། འཇིག་རྟེན་
ལས་ཡང་དག་པར་འདས་པ་འཕགས་པའི་ས་རབ་ཏུ་དགའ་བ་མངོན་སུམ་དུ་ཐོབ་
པར་གྱུར་ཏོ། ཡ་མཚན་མང་པོའི་སྐྱེས་འདྲ་བའི། ། བསྟན་པ་རིན་ཆེན་དེ་ཐོབ་
ནས། ། སྲིད་པའི་སྡུག་བསྔལ་ཐམས་ཅད་བཏང་། ། བདེ་བ་ཐམས་ཅད་ཡང་
དག་རྫོགས། ། རྟག་ཏུ་འགྲོགས་ལས་མ་རྙེད་པའི། ། དབུལ་པོའི་ཁྱིམ་གྱི་གཏེར་
མཐོང་ལྟར། ། རང་གི་བདག་ཉིད་ཡེ་ཤེས་ནི། ། བླ་མའི་བྱིན་རླབས་མིག་གིས་
མཐོང་། ། ཐར་པའི་སྒོ་ནི་རབ་ཕྱེ་སྟེ། ། ངན་འགྲོར་གཞོལ་བའི་ཐེམ་སྐས་བཤིག།
མྱ་ངན་གདུང་བའི་ཆུ་རྒྱུན་བཅད། ། མིག་ལ་མཆི་མའི་རྒྱ་མཚོ་བསྐམས། ། གོས་
ཀྱིས་ཕྱིས་ལྟར་རྡུལ་བྲལ་ཞིང་། ། འདམ་ལས་བརྒལ་བཞིན་ངལ་བསོ་བརྟེན། །
འཚོ་བ་ ཐོབ་བཞིན་དབུགས་འབྱིན་རྙེད། ། བདུད་རྩིས་བྲན་བཞིན་ཚིམ་པར་
གྱུར། ། ཤེས་པས་རབ་ཏུ་དྭངས་བ་དང་། ། ནོར་བུ་བས་ཀྱང་ཡོན་ཏན་རྒྱས། །
ཧ་རི་ཙན་དན་བས་ཀྱང་བསིལ། ། ནམ་མཁའ་བས་ཀྱང་དྲི་མེད་ཐོབ། ། བརྒལ་
དཀའ་རབ་བརྒལ་རྙེད་དཀའ་རྣམས། ། རྙེད་ལས་ རབ་དགའ་རྒྱས་པ་དེ། །
འདོད་པའི་བདེ་བ་མ་ལུས་པས། ། ཆ་ཙམ་དོ་ཟླ་མིན་པར་གྱུར། ། དེ་ཡི་གྲགས་པ་
ཟླ་འོད་ལྟར། ། དཀར་བས་ཕྱོགས་ཀུན་དབང་བྱས་ཏེ། ། ལག་པ་ཟུམ་པའི་ཅོད་
པན་གྱིས། ། ལྷར་བཅས་འཇིག་རྟེན་ཕྱག་འཚལ་བྱེད། ། རིན་ཆེན་སྤོས་སོགས་
ཆར་པ་དང་། ། མེ་ཏོག་ཕྲེང་བ་རབ་ལྷུང་ཞིང་། ། མཁའ་ལས་ལྷ་ཡི་རྔ་རྣམས་
74



ཀྱིས། ། ཡ་ མཚན་ཕྱོགས་ སུ་ སྒྲོག་པར་བྱེད། ། དེ་ མཐོང་དགའ་བའི་ སྤུ་ལོང་
ལྟར། ། རྦ་ རླབས་ གོས་ རྒྱས་ རི་ བདུན་ གྱི། ། སྐ་ རགས་ མཛེས་ ལྡན་ ཆུ་ ཡི་
གཏེར། ། སྔོ་བསངས་གར་ལ་ཆགས་བཞིན་གཡོས། ། རིན་ཆེན་བཞི་ཡི་འོབས་ཀྱི་
ནི། ། རོལ་མཚོ་ཡོངས་སུ་འཁྲུགས་པ་ལས། ། ལྷུན་པོ་གསེར་གྱི་ལྟེ་བ་ཅན། །
ནོར་འཛིན་འཁོར་ལོ་རིང་ཞིག་འདར། ། ལྷ་ཡི་གཞལ་མེད་ཁང་རྒྱུན་དག ། སིལ་
སིལ་ཁྲོལ་བྱས་ལྷུན་པོ་བསྐྱོད། ། འཆི་མེད་དབང་པོས་མཆོད་པའི་ཕྱིར། ། བདུད་
རྩིའི་རྒྱ་མཚོ་བསྐྲུན་འདོད་བཞིན། ། དགེ་སྡིག་རི་མོ་རྣམ་བཀྲ་བའི། ། ལས་ཀྱི་
གཞི་ལྟར་ཡངས་པའི་ས། ། ལུས་ཅན་ཀུན་གྱི་བདེ་སྡུག་གི། ། གནས་ སྐབས་
བཞིན་དུ་མཐོ་དམན་གྱུར། ། དེ་ནས་ངང་པའི་རྒྱལ་པོ་བཞིན། ། ཏཱ་ལ་བདུན་
སྲིད་ནམ་མཁར་འཕགས། ། དུ་མར་བསྐོར་ཞིང་ རབ་ བཏུད་ནས། ། བསྟོད་
དབྱངས་སྙན་སྤྲིན་སྤྲོ་བར་བརྩོན། ། གང་ཞིག་འགྲོ་རྣམས་ཡུན་རིང་གོམས་པའི་
རྨོངས་པ་སྐད་ཅིག་ཉིད་ཀྱིས་འཕྲོག་བྱེད་ཅིང་། ། སྔོན་མེད་བདེ་བ་རབ་ཏུ་རྒྱས་པ་
བདུད་རྩིའི་དགའ་སྟོན་གསར་དུ་སྦྱིན་པར་བྱེད། ། ཐུབ་པར་དཀའ་བ་བདུད་ཀྱི་
ལས་ནི་འཕྲལ་དུ་སྐྱེངས་པས་ཞུམ་ལ་རབ་བཀོད་དེ། ། ཉམ་ཐག་སྐྱེ་བོ་སྡུག་བསྔལ་
ལས་བསྒྲལ་བླ་མེད་ཆོས་ཀྱི་རྒྱལ་སྲིད་ཆེ་ལ་བཞག ། ཁྱོད་ནི་ཉི་མ་མིན་ཡང་གཅིག་
པུས་འགྲོ་ལ་སྣང་བྱེད་རི་བོང་གཟུགས་ལྡན་པའི། ། བསིལ་ཟེར་ཅན་མིན་ཀུན་
དགའི་འོད་དཀར་ཕྱོགས་སུ་རབ་སྤྲོ་བུང་བའི་རྣ་རྒྱུན་ནི། ། ཉེ་བར་འཁོར་ལྡན་
གཉིས་འཐུང་མིན་ཡང་ཉོན་མོངས་འདམ་བུའི་ཚལ་འཇོམས་རལ་པ་ཡི། ། འཁྲི་
ཤིང་གྱེན་དུ་འཕྱུར་བཅས་སེང་གེ་མིན་ཡང་ལྟ་ངན་རི་དྭགས་སྐྲག་པར་བྱེད། །ས་
ནི་སྐྱེ་འགྲོ་ཀུན་གྱི་ཁུར་ཆེན་འཛིན་བཟོད་དྲི་མེད་གངྒཱའི་ཆུ་རྒྱུན་ནི། ། ཀུན་ཏུ་རྒྱུ་
བས་མི་ངལ་ཆུ་འཛིན་ཆུ་ནི་མང་པོ་སྤྲོ་བས་སྐྱོ་བ་མེད། ། དཔག་བསམ་ཤིང་ནི་
འགྲོ་ལ་ཅི་འདོད་སྦྱིན་ལས་ལན་ཡང་རེ་བ་མེད་པ་སྟེ། ། དེ་བཞིན་ཁྱོད་ཀྱང་རྟག་
ཏུ་གཞན་ཕན་ལ་དགྱེས་ནམ་ཡང་གཡེལ་བ་ཡོད་མ་ཡིན། ། བློ་གྲོས་རབ་ཡངས་
ཡོན་ཏན་འདབ་གཤོག་རྣམ་རྒྱུས་མཁས་པའི་གཙུག་གིས་ལེགས་བསྟེན་པས། །
75



1:1--**ww.hB8, *** 1**
*:***11=1.* ;' '༩
7t+w*w!++༩
:|:
ཀ%11.++
++
1:
ཁྱོད་ནི་ རྒྱུ་ སྐར་ ལམ་ དང་ མཁའ་ ལྡིང་ དབང་ པོ་ ཡང་ ན་ ནོར་ བུའི་ ཅོད་ པན་
མཚུངས། ། ཉེས་པའི་གོ་སྐབས་མི་འབྱེད་གཡེང་བའི་རླུང་གིས་མི་བསྐྱོད་གདེངས་
ཅན་བདག་པོ་ཡི། ། དབང་གྱུར་མིན་སླད་ཀུན་ནས་མཚུངས་མིན་ཁྱོད་ནི་སྐྱོན་
མེད་ཡོན་ཏན་རྒྱུས་པ་ལགས། ། ཨུཏྤལ་ལྟར་ཡངས་སྤྱན་ནི་བློ་མིག་ལྡོང་ལ་ལམ་
མཁན་ཡལ་འདབ་རབ་རྒྱས་པའི། ། ཆུ་སྐྱེས་བཞིན་མཛེས་ཕྱག་གཉིས་གདུང་བས་
ཉེན་པའི་འགྲོ་ལ་ཡོངས་སྐྱོབ་གྲིབ་བསིལ་གྱིས། ། ལྗོན་པའི་ཆོས་མཚུངས་རྒྱ་མཚོ་
ལྟར་ཟབ་ཐུགས་མཛོད་ཆོས་ཀྱི་ཕོངས་ལ་བདུད་རྩིའི་གཏེར། ། ཉི་གཞོན་ལྟ་བུར་
དམར་བའི་ཞབས་སེན་དབང་པོར་བཅས་པའི་སྐྱེ་རྒུའི་ཅོད་པན་ཉིད། ། ཁྱོད་ནི་
ཆགས་པ་ཀུན་དང་བྲལ་ཕྱིར་ཉམ་ཐག་འགྲོ་ལ་བུ་གཅིག་བཞིན་དུ་ཆགས། །
འཁོར་བའི་འདམ་ལས་ཡོངས་སུ་བརྒལ་ནས་གཞན་གྱི་དོན་སླད་སྲིད་མཚོར་མངོན་
པར་དགྱེས། ། བདག་གི་བདེ་ལ་སྲེད་པ་བཏང་ནས་སྐྱེ་འགྲོའི་སྡུག་བསྔལ་མ་ལུས་
དང་དུ་ལེན། ། ཁྱོད་ཀྱི་ཡོན་ཏན་བརྗོད་བརྩོན་འགྲོ་འདིས་ཡོན་ཏན་མཐའ་ནི་
ནམ་ཡང་རྟོགས་ནུས་མིན། ། དེ་ལྟར་དགའ་བ་མང་པོས་བསྟོད་ཅིང་མཆོད་པ་
ཀུན་གྱི་བཤེས་གཉེན་དམ་པ་མཆོད། ། སྣ་ཚོགས་ཐབས་ཀྱིས་འགྲོ་རྣམས་སྲིད་
དང་ཐར་པའི་བདེ་ལ་སྐྱོ་བ་མེད་པར་བཀོད། ། ཇི་ལྟ་ཇི་ལྟར་བསོད་ནམས་མི་ཟད་
གཏེར་གྱིས་རྒྱུད་ནི་ཡོངས་སུ་གང་གྱུར་པ། ། དེ་ལྟ་དེ་ལྟར་ཟབ་མོའི་ཡེ་ཤེས་ཡར་
ངོའི་ཟླ་ལྟར་མཆོག་ཏུ་ཡང་དག་འཕེལ། ། དེ་དག་མི་ཟད་ཡེ་ཤེས་མཆོག་ལ་མངའ་
བརྙེས་ལུས་ནི་བྱ་བ་མང་པོར་མངོན་སྤྲུལ་སྐད་ཅིག་རེར་ཡང་ཕྱོགས་བཅུའི་ཞིང་
མང་མཐའ་ཡས་རྣམས་སུ་བགྲོད། ། མཆོད་སྤྲིན་རྒྱ་མཚོ་དུ་མས་རྒྱལ་བ་ཉི་མ་
རྣམས་མཆོད་དེ་དག་གསུང་རབ་རྒྱ་མཚོ་ཡོངས་འཛིན་དཔག་མེད་ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྒོ་ལ་
རང་དབང་ལྡན་པར་འཇུག ། བདེ་འགྲོར་གནས་རྣམས་འདོད་ལ་མངོན་པར་སྐྱོ་
བྱེད་ངན་འགྲོར་ལྷུང་རྣམས་སྡུག་བསྔལ་ཉེ་བར་ཞི་བྱེད་སྐལ་བ་ཇི་བཞིན་ཐེག་
གསུམ་ལམ་ལ་ཡོངས་སུ་འདྲེན། ། དེ་ལྟར་བརྩོན་ལས་ཡོན་ཏན་ཀུན་གྱི་ཕ་རོལ་
ཕྱིན་ཐོབ་རིམ་གྱིས་དྲི་མ་ཀུན་སྦྱངས་ཚོགས་གཉིས་རྫོགས་ནས་བླ་ན་མེད་པའི་བྱང་
་76



ཆུབ་མངོན་དུ་གྱུར། ། དེ་ལྟར་བསོད་ནམས་ཡོངས་རྫོགས་ཟླ་བ་དག་གི་རི་མོ་འདི་
ནི་བདག་གི་བློ་གྲོས་དགེ་བ་ཡི། ། ཚོན་གྱིས་རབ་བརླན་ཀུན་རྟོག་པིར་གྱིས་ལེགས་
བྲིས་ཀུན་དགའ་རབ་བསྐྱེད་བདུད་རྩི་ཉིད་དུ་བྱས་འདི་ནི། ། ཇི་སྲིད་ཉི་མ་འོད་
སྟོང་ལྡན་ཞིང་ནོར་འཛིན་གཞི་ནི་ཆུ་གཏེར་གཡོ་བའི་གོས་དང་མ་བྲལ་ལ། །
འཇིག་རྟེན་འདི་ཡང་མཐར་བྱེད་རླུང་གིས་དུས་མཐར་མ་བྱས་དེ་སྲིད་དམ་པའི་
གནས་སུ་སྤྱོད་གྱུར་ཅིག ། སྤྲིན་རྣམས་དུས་སུ་ཆར་འབེབས་པ་ནི་ལོ་ཏོག་སྨིན་པ་
སྦྱིན་ལ་ཡོངས་སུ་སྐྱོ་བ་མེད་པ་དང༌། ། མི་བསྲུན་གྱ་གྱུའི་སྦྱོར་བ་མཐའ་དག་རབ་
ཞི་ལུས་ཅན་རྣམས་ནི་རྟག་ཏུ་ཆོས་ཀྱི་འཚོ་དང་ལྡན། ། ཕོངས་པའི་གདུང་བ་
བཅོམ་སྟེ་ཅི་འདོད་བདེ་བ་བྱིན་ནས་ཐུབ་པའི་བསྟན་པ་དབང་གི་རྒྱལ་པོ་འདི། །
སྐྱེ་འགྲོ་ཀུན་གྱི་སྤྱི་བོས་མཆོད་ཅིང་བརྟན་གཡོའི་འཇིག་རྟེན་དགེ་བ་རྣམས་ཀྱིས་
རྟག་ཏུ་འབྱོར་གྱུར་ཅིག ། ཡེ་ཤེས་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་རྣམ་རྒྱས་རྟོག་པའི་འོད་སྟོང་
འཕྲོ་བས་མ་རིག་མུན་པ་སེལ། ། ཤེས་བྱའི་མཁའ་ལ་རབ་མཛེས་རྣམ་དཔྱོད་ཚ་
ཟེར་རྣོ་བས་ལོག་རྟོག་གངས་རི་འཇོམས། ། གདུལ་བྱའི་པད་ཚལ་ལེགས་སྐྱོང་
འཇིག་རྟེན་རྣམས་ནི་རྟག་ཏུ་ཉིན་མོར་བྱེད་པ་ཡིས། ། སྐྱེ་འགྲོའི་ལམ་སྟོན་མཛད་
པའི་ཤེས་རབ་ཉི་མ་དེ་ནི་ལྕེ་བརྒྱུས་བསྔགས་པར་འོས། ། དེ་ལྟར་འཇིག་རྟེན་ན་
རྨོངས་པའི་མུན་པ་ནི་ཡེ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་ཉི་མས་ཀུན་ཏུ་འཕྲོག་པར་བྱེད་པ་ཉིད་དོ་ཞེས་
ཤེས་རབ་རྨད་དུ་བྱུང་བ་བསྔགས་པ་དང༌། ཡང་དག་པའི་དགེ་བའི་བཤེས་གཉེན་
གུས་པས་བསྟེན་ན་དེའི་དྲིན་ལས་ཡོན་ཏན་ཐམས་ཅད་ཀྱི་ཕ་རོལ་དུ་ཕྱིན་པ་འཐོབ་
པར་འགྱུར་རོ་ཞེས་དགེ་བའི་བཤེས་གཉེན་གྱི་ཆེ་བ་བརྗོད་པ་དང༌། འདི་ལྟར་
གདམས་པའི་ཆོས་ནི་སེམས་ཅན་ཐམས་ཅད་ཀྱི་སྐྱབས་དང་དཔུང་གཉེན་དང་གླིང་
དུ་གྱུར་པ་ཡིན་ནོ་ཞེས་ཀྱང་བྱའོ། ། རབ་ཏུ་བྱེད་པ་བདུན་པའོ། ། ། །།
77



བ………………………………
. ་་་ ་，
，
མཛད་བྱང་།
:51:32
རྟོགས་བརྗོད་གོང་གསལ་རྒྱ་གཞུང་ཡིན་པ་མ་ཟད། དོན་རྒྱན་སོ་ལྔའི་རྐང་
གྲངས་ཚང་ བར་ ཡོད་ ལུགས་ སོགས་ བཤེས་ གཉེན་ བཞད་ པ་ རྡོ་ རྗེ་ ཞུ་བ་ ནས་
བསྔགས་བརྗོད་གང་ཆེ་མཛད་འདུག་པ་དང་། དཔེ་གཞན་ཞིག་གི་གཤམ་དུ་
མཚན་གཞན་ཨུ་མ་པ་ཏི་ཞུ་ཞེས་གསལ་བ་ལ་གཞིགས་ན་མཁས་གྲུབ་རྗེའི་ཐུབ་
བསྟན་བྱི་དོར་དུ་གསུངས་པའི་ཁམས་པ་དགེ་འདུན་བཟང་པོས་མངའ་རིས་སུ་
སྤྱན་དྲངས་པའི་རྒྱ་གར་གྱི་པཎྜི་ཏ་ཨུ་མ་པ་ཏི་ཞུ་བ་དེ་ཉིད་ཀྱིས་མཛད་པ་ཡིན་
འདུག་པ་ཚིག་དོན་ཕུན་སུམ་ཚོགས་ཤིང་དབུས་གཙང་གི་ལྗོངས་འདིར་ཤིན་ཏུ་
དཔེ་རྒྱུན་དཀོན་པའི་སྙན་ངག་གི་བསྟན་བཅོས་ཁྱད་འཕགས་ཤིག་རང་ཡིན་འདུག་
ན་གཅེས་སྤྲས་གང་ཆེ་མཛད་དགོས་སོ། །
ན་མོ་མཉྫ་ཤི་སྭསྟི། ཆོས་རབ་རྣམ་འབྱེད་བློ་གྲོས་རབ་གསལ་བར། ། རབ་
ཏུ་མཁོ་བའི་རྒྱུ་བོད་མཁས་རྣམས་ཀྱི། ། ཞལ་ལུང་མངར་པོའི་སྙན་གཞུང་བསྟན་
བཅོས་རྣམས། ། དད་པའི་ནོར་ལྡན་སློབ་བུ་བསམ་འཕེལ་གྱི། ། མོས་ངོར་རང་
གི་བློ་མཚོ་དྭངས་པ་ལས། ། བསྟན་དང་འགྲོ་ལ་ཕན་པའི་ལྷག་བསམ་གྱི། ། སྦ་སྲི་
མེད་པའི་ལག་ཁྲིད་རྒྱུན་སྤེལ་འདི། ། ལྷག་པར་བརྩེ་བའི་དཔོན་པོ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ། །
དབང་གི་རྒྱལ་པོའི་ཞབས་འདེགས་འགྲུབ་ཕྱིར་དུ། ། སྙན་ངག་གཞུང་འགྲེལ་
མངོན་བརྗོད་མཁོ་ཆེ་རྣམས། ། བུ་དཔེར་བགྱིད་དུ་བཅུག་དང་ཁྱད་པར་ནི། །
རྒྱ་གཞུང་སྙན་ཚིག་གཞོན་ནུ་དྲུག་གི་ནི། ། རྟོགས་བརྗོད་ཆོས་དང་འཇིག་རྟེན་
གཙུག་ལག་དང་། ། ཁྱད་པར་ཐེག་མཆོག་ངེས་དོན་ཟབ་མོའི་ལམ། ། མ་ཚང་
མེད་པ་ཡིད་བཞིན་ནོར་བུ་འདི། ། སྙན་ཚིག་མེ་ལོང་དོན་རྒྱུན་སོ་ལྔ་དང་། ། ལེའུ་
**
•
:•
:
sia
a



+st&sst༩:ཁt བirtier6rpཙཱis#*#*#@il**##%itii-Fii-centriviatstreitfat&vith iཁr hfxFiiiii**irinh»f# % tie
:3
༩
༧
5
9
e ase:1:: 1
sv=w
19
བཀྲ་ཤིས། ཞལ་གྲོ། ། ། །
ཤོག ། ཅེས་པའི་གསུང་རྩོམ་བཤེས་གཉེན་བཞད་པའི་རྡོ་རྗེས་མཛད་པའོ། །
གསལ་བུ་ཡི་བློ་མིག་རབ་གསལ་དྭངས། ། ངག་གི་མཆོག་སྦྱིན་ཐོབ་པའི་དཔལ་དུ་
ཡང་གཞན་ཕན་ལ། ། དགའ་བའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར་བདག་གི་སྦྱིན་པའི་མཐུས། ། བློ་
མཛོད། ། བརྒྱ་དང་ཉི་ཤུ་རྩ་གཉིས་བགྲང་བྱ་རུ། ། ཚང་བའི་བསྟན་བཅོས་འདི་
དང་པོ་ སྒྲ་ རྒྱུན་ཟུང་ ལྡན་ སོགས། ། དེ་ དག་ རྣམ་ གྲངས་ མ་ ཚང་ མེད་ པའི་ .
1
tt:༥༧g bsss/gstite
,
gesཏྟsi-p:|:#F%༣ »པཏཏྟ» ཚ༩༧༣ གྱུར་ཡst , St,4%9%=jstist%ht+%e, ཏt 1 •ཆt washiitig#at #*#*#
སz#titfiihrtiva htwirtistrArth/itsittisitsiiusit in



གཞོན་ནུ་དྲུག་གི་རྟོགས་བརྗོད།
རྩོམ་མཁན།
རྒྱ་གར་གྱི་སྙན་ངག་མཁན་རྒྱལ་བ་སྡེ།
སྒྱུར་མཁན། པད་མ་རྒྱ་མཚོ། ལྡེའུ་ཧྥུ།
རྩོམ་སྒྲིག་འགན་འཁུར་བ། རྡོ་སྦིས་ཚེ་རིང་རྡོ་རྗེ།
མདུན་ཤོག་འཆར་འགོད་པ། ལྡེའུ་གླུ།
བོད་ལྗོངས་མི་དམངས་དཔེ་སྐྲུན་ཁང་།
དཔེ་སྐྲུན་འགྲེམས་སྤེལ་ཚན་པ།
(ལྷ་ས་གླིང་སྐོར་བྱང་ལམ་སྒོ་ཨང20)
པར་འདེབས་ཚན་པ། སི་ཁྲོན་རང་བྱུང་ཁམས་པར་འདེབས་ཚད་ཡོད་ཀུང་སི།
དེབ་ཚད།
787mm X 960nun 1/16
པར་ཤོག
16
ཁྲི་12
པར་གཞི།
2007ལོའི་ཟླ7པར་པར་གཞི་བསྒྲིགས།
པར་ཐེངས།
2007ལོའི་ཟླ7པར་པར་ཐེངས1བཏབ།
པར་གྲུངས།
01 - 2,000
དཔེ་དེབ་ཨང་རྟགས། ISBN978 པགས 7-223 ཡཁ 02203 ཁ3
རིན་གོང་སྒོར། 32.00
ཡིག་གྲངས།
-
--
--
----
-
པར་གཞི་སྒེར་བདག་ཡིན་པས་འདྲ་བཅོས་པར་འདེབས་མི་ཆོག



.
..
..
.
...
.
-
--------
..
.
......
..
Book Title: The Six Brothers
Translators: Pema Gyatso, Geoff Bailey
Publishing Editor: Dobi Tsering Dorje
Cover Designer: Geoff Bailey
Cover photo: Geoff Bailey
Printing Press: Tibet People's Press
20 North Lingkhor Rd, Lhasa, TAR
First Edition: July, 2007
ISBN 978-7-223-02203-3
Copyright © 2007 Geoff Bailey and the Tibetan Academy of Social Science,
Lhasa, TAR All rights reserved.
een



ased on the lives of six brothers, this intriguing story forms an analogy to the six
virtuous perfections of the Bodhisattvas. The story unfolds around the lives of the three
older brothers who are in the grip of worldly desires and attached to the fleeting pleas-
ures of cyclical existence. The three younger brothers, who are in fact Bodhisattvas,
constantly try to persuade the older brothers to give up their lives of folly and to enter
the true path to enlightenment. Through their various journeys, the older brothers land
themselves in all kinds of strife requiring the younger brothers to rescue them - an alle
gorical play on the true nature of a Bodhisattva. Eventually the older brothers see the
error of their ways, repent and start on the right path to enlightenment.
The Six Brothers
Greatly loved by the Tibetan people, this story is considered to be one of the most
exquisitely written texts in the Tibetan language. The Six Brothers is written in a unique-
ly Tibetan style of prose and poetry and is often referred to as the 'mother' of all Tibetan
poetry. Though the authorship of this epic is unknown, most scholars estimate that it
was written six to seven hundred years ago. Having been directly translated from the
Tibetan text, this famous Tibetan story is now available in English for the first time.
am delighted that Pema Gyatso and Geoff Bailey have completed this inaugural trans-
lation of The Six Brothers. I found this translation to be personally very beneficial and
I know that it would be extremely helpful to all those who wish to study Buddhism and
Tibetan poetry. Congratulations on producing such an excellent translation!
Professor Lhakpa Tseten, Foreign Students Tibetan Language Department,
Tibet University.
གཞོན་ནུ་དྲུག་གི་རྟོགས་བརྗོད།
n eloquent and painstaking translation of an important Tibetan narrative famed
for its engaging Buddhist tale and evocative Tibetan verse. Pema Gyatso and Geoff
Bailey have done a stellar job with a very challenging text.
David Germano, Associate Professor of Tibetan Studies, University of Virginia.
Pema Gyatso is a graduate from the Tibetan Language Department of Tibet University and
has studied under many great masters. He presently works as a researcher of Tibetan lan-
guage and culture at the Tibetan Academy of Social Science, Lhasa.
Geoff Bailey is currently a resident scholar at the Tibetan Academy of Social Science,
having graduated from the Tibet University Tibetan language program. He has been
involved in numerous Tibetan language projects.
ISBN 978-7-223-02203-3
བོད་ལྗོངས་མི་དམངས་དཔེ་སྐྲུན་ཁང་།
9 11787223||0 22033|| >
UT: 32.0071
